A MEMBER OF THE INTERNATIONAL CODE FAMILY®

IBC®

INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Receive FREE updates, excerpts of code references, technical 
articles, and more when you register your code book. Go to 

www.iccsafe.org/CodesPlus today!

8-61816-01_IBC_TitlePg_Final.indd   1

2/4/2009   12:42:56 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 International Building Code ®

First Printing: February 2009

ISBN: 978-1-58001-725-1 (soft-cover edition)
ISBN: 978-1-58001-724-4 (loose-leaf edition)

COPYRIGHT © 2009
by
INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This 2009 International Building Code® is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Coun-
cil, Inc. Without advance written permission from the copyright owner, no part of this book may be reproduced, distributed or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation, electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example, and
not limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage retrieval system). For information on permission to copy
material exceeding fair use, please contact: Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. Phone
1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233 ).

Trademarks: “International Code Council,” the “International Code Council” logo and the “International Building Code” are trade-
marks of the International Code Council, Inc.

PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.

0a_ibc_copy_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)a_ibc_copy_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:30:22 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PREFACE

Introduction

Internationally, code officials recognize the need for a modern, up-to-date building code addressing the design and installation of
building systems through requirements emphasizing performance. The International Building Code®, in this 2009 edition, is
designed to meet these needs through model code regulations that safeguard the public health and safety in all communities, large
and small.
This comprehensive building code establishes minimum regulations for building systems using prescriptive and perfor-
mance-related provisions. It is founded on broad-based principles that make possible the use of new materials and new building
designs. This 2009 edition is fully compatible with all the International Codes® (I-Codes®) published by the International Code
Council (ICC)®, including the International Energy Conservation Code®, International Existing Building Code®, International
Fire Code®, International Fuel Gas Code®, International Mechanical Code®, ICC Performance Code®, International Plumbing
Code®, International Private Sewage Disposal Code®, International Property Maintenance Code®, International Residential
Code®, International Wildland-Urban Interface Code™ and International Zoning Code®.
The International Building Code provisions provide many benefits, among which is the model code development process that
offers an international forum for building professionals to discuss performance and prescriptive code requirements. This forum pro-
vides an excellent arena to debate proposed revisions. This model code also encourages international consistency in the application
of provisions.

Development

The first edition of the International Building Code (2000) was the culmination of an effort initiated in 1997 by the ICC. This
included five drafting subcommittees appointed by ICC and consisting of representatives of the three statutory members of the
International Code Council at that time, including: Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), Inter-
national Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) and Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI). The intent was to
draft a comprehensive set of regulations for building systems consistent with and inclusive of the scope of the existing model codes.
Technical content of the latest model codes promulgated by BOCA, ICBO and SBCCI was utilized as the basis for the development,
followed by public hearings in 1997, 1998 and 1999 to consider proposed changes. This 2009 edition presents the code as originally
issued, with changes reflected in the 2003 and 2006 editions and further changes approved through the ICC Code Development Pro-
cess through 2008. A new edition such as this is promulgated every 3 years.
This code is founded on principles intended to establish provisions consistent with the scope of a building code that adequately
protects public health, safety and welfare; provisions that do not unnecessarily increase construction costs; provisions that do not
restrict the use of new materials, products or methods of construction; and provisions that do not give preferential treatment to par-
ticular types or classes of materials, products or methods of construction.

Adoption

The International Building Code is available for adoption and use by jurisdictions internationally. Its use within a governmental
jurisdiction is intended to be accomplished through adoption by reference in accordance with proceedings establishing the jurisdic-
tion’s laws. At the time of adoption, jurisdictions should insert the appropriate information in provisions requiring specific local
information, such as the name of the adopting jurisdiction. These locations are shown in bracketed words in small capital letters in
the code and in the sample ordinance. The sample adoption ordinance on page xv addresses several key elements of a code adoption
ordinance, including the information required for insertion into the code text.

Maintenance

The International Building Code is kept up to date through the review of proposed changes submitted by code enforcing officials,
industry representatives, design professionals and other interested parties. Proposed changes are carefully considered through an
open code development process in which all interested and affected parties may participate.
The contents of this work are subject to change both through the Code Development Cycles and the governmental body that
enacts the code into law. For more information regarding the code development process, contact the Code and Standard Develop-
ment Department of the International Code Council.
While the development procedure of the International Building Code assures the highest degree of care, ICC, its members and
those participating in the development of this code do not accept any liability resulting from compliance or noncompliance with the
provisions because ICC does not have the power or authority to police or enforce compliance with the contents of this code. Only the
governmental body that enacts the code into law has such authority.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

iii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:49 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Letter Designations in Front of Section Numbers

In each code development cycle, proposed changes to the code are considered at the Code Development Hearings by the applicable
ICC Code Development Committee, whose action constitutes a recommendation to the voting membership for final action on the
proposed change. Proposed changes to a code section that has a number beginning with a letter in brackets are considered by a dif-
ferent code development committee. For example, proposed changes to code sections that have [F] in front of them (e.g., [F]
903.1.1.1) are considered by the ICC Fire Code Development Committee at the code development hearings.
The content of sections in this code that begin with a letter designation are maintained by another code development committee in
accordance with the following:
[E] = International Energy Conservation Code Development Committee;
[EB] = International Existing Building Code Development Committee;
[F] = International Fire Code Development Committee;
[FG] = International Fuel Gas Code Development Committee;
[M] = International Mechanical Code Development Committee; and
[P] = International Plumbing Code Development Committee.

Marginal Markings

Solid vertical lines in the margins within the body of the code indicate a technical change from the requirements of the 2006 edition.
Deletion indicators in the form of an arrow ( ¬ ) are provided in the margin where an entire section, paragraph, exception or table
has been deleted or an item in a list of items or a table has been deleted.
Chapter 7 user note: Chapter 7 of the code has been reorganized from the 2006 edition as a result of an approved code change
proposal. This proposal renumbered what was Section 714 in the 2006 edition to Section 704 in this edition, which in turn resulted in
renumbering Sections 704 through 713 in the 2006 edition to Sections 705 through 714 in this edition. Marginal markings are
included at each section number but have not been included to reflect the subsection renumbering.

Coordination between the International Building and Fire Codes

Because the coordination of technical provisions is one of the benefits of adopting the ICC family of model codes, users will find the
ICC codes to be a very flexible set of model documents. To accomplish this flexibility some technical provisions are duplicated in
some of the model code documents. While the International Codes are provided as a comprehensive set of model codes for the built
environment, documents are occasionally adopted as a stand-alone regulation. When one of the model documents is adopted as the
basis of a stand-alone code, that code should provide a complete package of requirements with enforcement assigned to the entity
for which the adoption is being made.
The model codes can also be adopted as a family of complimentary codes. When adopted together there should be no conflict of
any of the technical provisions. When multiple model codes are adopted in a jurisdiction it is important for the adopting authority to
evaluate the provisions in each code document and determine how and by which agency(ies) they will be enforced. It is important,
therefore, to understand that where technical provisions are duplicated in multiple model documents that enforcement duties must
be clearly assigned by the local adopting jurisdiction. ICC remains committed to providing state-of-the-art model code documents
that, when adopted locally, will reduce the cost to government of code adoption and enforcement and protect the public health,
safety and welfare.

Italicized Terms

Selected terms set forth in Chapter 2, Definitions, are italicized where they appear in code text (except those in Sections 1903
through 1908 where italics indicate provisions that differ from ACI 318). Such terms are not italicized where the definition set forth
in Chapter 2 does not impart the intended meaning in the use of the term. The terms selected have definitions which the user should
read carefully to facilitate better understanding of the code.

iv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:49 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Effective Use of the International Building Code

The International Building Code® (IBC®) is a model code that provides minimum requirements to safeguard the public health,
safety and general welfare of the occupants of new and existing buildings and structures. The IBC is fully compatible with the ICC
family of codes, including: International Energy Conservation Code® (IECC®), International Existing Building Code® (IEBC®),
International Fire Code® (IFC®), International Fuel Gas Code® (IFGC®), International Mechanical Code® (IMC®), ICC Perfor-
mance Code® (ICCPC®), International Plumbing Code® (IPC®), International Private Sewage Disposal Code® (IPSDC®), Interna-
tional Property Maintenance Code® (IPMC®), International Residential Code® (IRC®), International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code™ (IWUIC®) and International Zoning Code® (IZC®).
The IBC addresses structural strength, means of egress, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation, accessibility, energy con-
servation and life safety in regards to new and existing buildings, facilities and systems. The codes are promulgated on a 3-year cycle
to allow for new construction methods and technologies to be incorporated into the codes. Alternative materials, designs and meth-
ods not specifically addressed in the code can be approved by the code official where the proposed materials, designs or methods
comply with the intent of the provisions of the code (see Section 104.11).
The IBC applies to all occupancies, including one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses that are not within the scope of the
IRC. The IRC is referenced for coverage of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses as defined in the Exception to
Section 101.2 and the definition for “townhouse” in Chapter 2. The IBC applies to all types of buildings and structures unless
exempted. Work exempted from permits is listed in Section 105.2.

Arrangement and Format of the 2009 IBC

Before applying the requirements of the IBC, it is beneficial to understand its arrangement and format. The IBC, like other codes
published by ICC, is arranged and organized to follow sequential steps that generally occur during a plan review or inspection.

Chapters

1–2

3

4, 31

5–6

7–9

10

11

12–13, 27–30

14–26

32

33

34

35

Subjects

Administration and definitions

Use and occupancy classifications

Special requirements for specific occupancies or elements

Height and area limitations based on type of construction

Fire resistance and protection requirements

Requirements for evacuation

Specific requirements to allow use and access to a building for persons with disabilities

Building systems, such as lighting, HVAC, plumbing fixtures, elevators

Structural components—performance and stability

Encroachment outside of property lines

Safeguards during construction

Existing building allowances

Referenced standards

Appendices A–K

Appendices

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

v

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:50 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

The IBC requirements for high hazard, fire-resistance-rated construction, interior finish, fire protection systems, means of
egress, emergency and standby power, and temporary structures are directly correlated with the requirements of the IFC. The fol-
lowing chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated to the IFC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

IFC
Chapter/Section

Subject

Sections 307, 414, 415

Chapters 27–44

High-hazard requirements

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 27

Section 3103

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Section 604

Chapter 24

Fire-resistance-rated construction

Interior finish, decorative materials and furnishings

Fire protection systems

Means of egress

Standby and emergency power

Temporary structures

The IBC requirements for smoke control systems, and smoke and fire dampers are directly correlated to the requirements of the
IMC. IBC Chapter 28 is a reference to the IMC and the IFGC for chimney, fireplaces and barbeques, and all aspects of mechanical
systems. The following chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated with the IMC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

Section 716

Section 909

IMC
Chapter/Section

Section 607

Section 513

Subject

Smoke and fire dampers

Smoke control

The IBC requirements for plumbing fixtures and toilet rooms are directly correlated to the requirements of the IPC. The following
chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated with the IPC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

Chapter 29

IPC
Chapter/Section

Chapters 3 & 4

Subject

Plumbing fixtures and facilities

The following is a chapter-by-chapter synopsis of the scope and intent of the provisions of the International Building Code.
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration. Chapter 1 establishes the limits of applicability of the code and describes how the code is to
be applied and enforced. Chapter 1 is in two parts, Part 1—Scope and Application (Sections 101–102) and Part 2—Administration
and Enforcement (Sections 103–116). Section 101 identifies which buildings and structures come under its purview and references
other ICC codes as applicable. Standards and codes are scoped to the extent referenced (see Section 102.4).
The building code is intended to be adopted as a legally enforceable document and it cannot be effective without adequate provi-
sions for its administration and enforcement. The provisions of Chapter 1 establish the authority and duties of the code official
appointed by the jurisdiction having authority and also establish the rights and privileges of the design professional, contractor and
property owner.
Chapter 2 Definitions. All terms that are defined in the code are listed alphabetically in Chapter 2. Terms are defined in Chapter 2
or there is a reference to the section where the definition is located. While a defined term may be listed in one chapter or another, the
meaning is applicable throughout the code.
Codes are technical documents and every word, term and punctuation mark can impact the meaning of the code text and the
intended results. The code often uses terms that have a unique meaning in the code and the code meaning can differ substantially
from the ordinarily understood meaning of the term as used outside of the code. Where understanding of a term’s definition is espe-
cially key to or necessary for understanding a particular code provision, the term is shown in italics wherever it appears in the code.

vi

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:55 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

This is true only for those terms that have a meaning that is unique to the code. In other words, the generally understood meaning
of a term or phrase might not be sufficient or consistent with the meaning prescribed by the code; therefore, it is essential that the
code-defined meaning be known.
Definitions are deemed to be of prime importance in establishing the meaning and intent of the code text that uses the terms. The
user of the code should be familiar with and consult this chapter because the definitions are essential to the correct interpretation of
the code and because the user may not be aware that a term is defined.
Chapter 3 Use and Occupancy Classification. Chapter 3 provides for the classification of buildings, structures and parts thereof
based on the purpose or purposes for which they are used. Section 302 identifies the groups into which all buildings, structures and
parts thereof must be classified. Sections 303 through 312 identify the occupancy characteristics of each group classification. In
some sections, specific group classifications having requirements in common are collectively organized such that one term applies
to all. For example, Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4 and A-5 are individual groups for assembly-type buildings. The general term
“Group A,” however, includes each of these individual groups. Other groups include Business (B), Educational (E), Factory (F-1,
F-2), High Hazard (H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5), Institutional (I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4), Mercantile (M), Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4), Stor-
age (S-1, S-2) and Utility (U). In some occupancies, the smaller number means a higher hazard, b ut that is not always the case.
Defining the use of the buildings is very important as it sets the tone for the remaining chapters of the code. Occupancy works
with the height, area and construction type requirements in Chapters 5 and 6, as well as the special provisions in Chapter 4, to deter-
mine “equivalent risk,” or providing a reasonable level of protection or life safety for building occupants. The determination of
equivalent risk involves three interdependent considerations: (1) the level of fire hazard associated with the specific occupancy of
the facility; (2) the reduction of fire hazard by limiting the floor area(s) and the height of the building based on the fuel load (combus-
tible contents and burnable building components) and (3) the level of overall fire resistance provided by the type of construction
used for the building. The greater the potential fire hazards indicated as a function of the group, the lesser the height and area allow-
ances for a particular construction type.
Occupancy classification also plays a key part in organizing and prescribing the appropriate protection measures. As such,
threshold requirements for fire protection and means of egress systems are based on occupancy classification (see Chapters 9 and
10). Other sections of the code also contain requirements respective to the classification of building groups. For example, Section
706 deals with requirements for fire wall fire-resistance ratings that are tied to the occupancy classification of a building and Section
803.9 contains interior finish requirements that are dependent upon the occupancy classification. The use of the space, rather than
the occupancy of the building is utilized for determining occupant loading (Section 1004) and live loading (Section 1607).
Chapter 4 Special Detailed Requirements Based On Use and Occupancy. Chapter 4 contains the requirements for protecting
special uses and occupancies, which are supplemental to the remainder of the code. Chapter 4 contains provisions that may alter
requirements found elsewhere in the code; however, the general requirements of the code still apply unless modified within the
chapter. For example, the height and area limitations established in Chapter 5 apply to all special occupancies unless Chapter 4 con-
tains height and area limitations. In this case, the limitations in Chapter 4 supersede those in other sections. An example of this is the
height and area limitations for open parking garages given in Section 406.3.5, which supersede the limitations given in Section 503.
In some instances, it may not be necessary to apply the provisions of Chapter 4. For example, if a covered mall building complies
with the provisions of the code for Group M, Section 402 does not apply; however, other sections that deal with a use, process or
operation must be applied to that specific occupancy, such as stages and platforms, special amusement buildings and hazardous
materials (Sections 410, 411 and 414).
The chapter includes requirements for buildings and conditions that apply to one or more groups, such as high-rise buildings,
underground buildings or atriums. Special uses may also imply specific occupancies and operations, such as for Group H, hazard-
ous materials, application of flammable finishes, drying rooms, organic coatings and combustible storage or hydrogen cutoff
rooms, all of which are coordinated with the IFC. Unique consideration is taken for special use areas, such as covered mall build-
ings, motor-vehicle-related occupancies, special amusement buildings and aircraft-related occupancies. Special facilities within
other occupancies are considered, such as stages and platforms, motion picture projection rooms and storm shelters. Finally, in
order that the overall package of protection features can be easily understood, unique considerations for specific occupancies are
addressed: Groups I-1, I-2, I-3, R-1, R-2, R-3 (by def inition R-4), ambulatory care facilities and live/work units.
Chapter 5 General Building Heights and Areas. Chapter 5 contains the provisions that regulate the minimum type of construc-
tion for area limits and height limits based on the occupancy of the building. Height and area increases (including allowances for
basements, mezzanines and equipment platforms) are permitted based on open frontage for fire department access, and the type of
sprinkler protection provided and separation (Sections 503–506, 509). These thresholds are reduced for buildings over three stories
in height in accordance with Section 506.4.1. Provisions include the protection and/or separation of incidental accessory occupan-
cies (Table 508.2.5), accessory occupancies (Sections 508.2) and mixed uses in the same building (Sections 506.5, 508.3, 508.4 and
509). Unlimited area buildings are permitted in certain occupancies when they meet special provisions (Section 507).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

vii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009pgvii.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Monday, March 09, 2009 9:04:29 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Table 503 is the keystone in setting thresholds for building size based on the building’s use and the materials with which it is con-
structed. If one then looks at Table 503, the relationship among group classification, allowable heights and areas and types of con-
struction becomes apparent. Respective to each group classification, the greater the fire-resistance rating of structural elements, as
represented by the type of construction, the greater the floor area and height allowances. The greater the potential fire hazards indi-
cated as a function of the group, the lesser the height and area allowances for a particular construction type.
Chapter 6 Types of Construction. The interdependence of these fire safety considerations can be seen by first looking at Tables
601 and 602, which show the fire-resistance ratings of the principal structural elements comprising a building in relation to the five
classifications for types of construction. Type I construction is the classification that generally requires the highest fire-resistance
ratings for structural elements, whereas Type V construction, which is designated as a combustible type of construction, generally
requires the least amount of fire-resistance-rated structural elements. The greater the potential fire hazards indicated as a function of
the group, the lesser the height and area allowances for a particular construction type. Section 603 includes a list of combustible ele-
ments that can be part of a noncombustible building (Types I and II construction).
Chapter 7 Fire and Smoke Protection Features. The provisions of Chapter 7 present the fundamental concepts of fire perfor-
mance that all buildings are expected to achieve in some form. This chapter identifies the acceptable materials, techniques and meth-
ods which proposed construction can be designed and evaluated against to determine a building’s ability to limit the impact of fire.
The fire-resistance-rated construction requirements within Chapter 7 provide passive resistance to the spread and effects of fire.
Types of separations addressed include fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, horizontal assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke par-
titions. A fire produces heat that can weaken structural components and smoke products that cause property damage and place occu-
pants at risk. The requirements of Chapter 7 work in unison with height and area requirements (Chapter 5), active fire detection and
suppression systems (Chapter 9) and occupant egress requirements (Chapter 10) to contain a fire should it occur while helping
ensure occupants are able to safely exit.
Chapter 8 Interior Finishes. This chapter contains the performance requirements for controlling fire growth within buildings by
restricting interior finish and decorative materials. Past fire experience has shown that interior finish and decorative materials are
key elements in the development and spread of fire. The provisions of Chapter 8 require materials used as interior finishes and deco-
rations to meet certain flame-spread index or flame-propagation criteria based on the relative fire hazard associated with the occu-
pancy. As smoke is also a hazard associated with fire, this chapter contains limits on the smoke development characteristics of
interior finishes. The performance of the material is evaluated based on test standards.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems. Chapter 9 prescribes the minimum requirements for active systems of fire protection equip-
ment to perform the following functions: detect a fire; alert the occupants or fire department of a fire emergency; and control smoke
and control or extinguish the fire. Generally, the requirements are based on the occupancy, the height and the area of the building,
because these are the factors that most affect fire-fighting capabilities and the relative hazard of a specific building or portion
thereof. This chapter parallels and is substantially duplicated in Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code (IFC); however, the IFC
Chapter 9 also contains periodic testing criteria that are not contained in the IBC. In addition, the special fire protection system
requirements based on use and occupancy found in IBC Chapter 4 are duplicated in IFC Chapter 9 as a user convenience.
Chapter 10 Means of Egress. The general criteria set forth in Chapter 10 regulating the design of the means of egress are estab-
lished as the primary method for protection of people in buildings by allowing timely relocation or evacuation of building occu-
pants. Both prescriptive and performance language is utilized in this chapter to provide for a basic approach in the determination of a
safe exiting system for all occupancies. It addresses all portions of the egress system (i.e., exit access, exits and exit discharge) and
includes design requirements as well as provisions regulating individual components. The requirements detail the size, arrange-
ment, number and protection of means of egress components. Functional and operational characteristics also are specified for the
components that will permit their safe use without special knowledge or effort. The means of egress protection requirements work
in coordination with other sections of the code, such as protection of vertical openings (see Chapter 7), interior finish (see Chapter
8), fire suppression and detection systems (see Chapter 9) and numerous others, all having an impact on life safety. Chapter 10 of the
IBC is duplicated in Chapter 10 of the IFC; however, the IFC contains two additional sections on the means of egress system in exist-
ing buildings.
Chapter 11 Accessibility. Chapter 11 contains provisions that set forth requirements for accessibility of buildings and their associ-
ated sites and facilities for people with physical disabilities. The fundamental philosophy of the code on the subject of accessibility
is that everything is required to be accessible. This is reflected in the basic applicability requirement (see Section 1103.1). The
code’s scoping requirements then address the conditions under which accessibility is not required in terms of exceptions to this gen-
eral mandate. While the IBC contains scoping provisions for accessibility (e.g., what, where and how many), ICC/ANSI A117.1,
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, is the referenced standard for the technical provisions (i.e., how).
There are many accessibility issues that not only benefit people with disabilities, but also provide a tangible benefit to people
without disabilities. This type of requirement can be set forth in the code as generally applicable without necessarily identifying it

viii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

specifically as an accessibility-related issue. Such a requirement would then be considered as having been “mainstreamed.” For
example, visible alarms are located in Chapter 9 and ramp requirements are addressed in Chapter 10.
Accessibility criteria for existing buildings are addressed in Section 3411. Appendix E is supplemental information included in
the code to address accessibility for items in the new Americans with Disabilities Act/Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility
Guidelines (ADA/ABA) that were not typically enforceable through the standard traditional building code enforcement approach
system (e.g., beds, room signage). The International Residential Code (IRC) references Chapter 11 for accessibility provisions;
therefore, this chapter may be applicable to housing covered under the IRC.
Chapter 12 Interior Environment. Chapter 12 provides minimum standards for the interior environment of a building. The stan-
dards address the minimum sizes of spaces, minimum temperature levels, and minimum light and ventilation levels. The collection
of requirements addresses limiting sound transmission through walls, ventilation of attic spaces and under floor spaces (crawl
spaces). Finally, the chapter provides minimum standards for walls, partitions and floors to resist water intrusion and damage in
rooms such as toilet and shower facilities, where water is frequently in use.
Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency. The purpose of Chapter 13 is to provide minimum design requirements that will promote efficient
utilization of energy in buildings. The requirements are directed toward the design of building envelopes with adequate thermal
resistance and low air leakage, and toward the design and selection of mechanical, water heating, electrical and illumination systems
that promote effective use of depletable energy resources. For the specifics of these criteria, Chapter 13 requires design and con-
struction in compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC).
Chapter 14 Exterior Walls. This chapter addresses requirements for exterior walls of buildings. Minimum standards for wall cov-
ering materials, installation of wall coverings and the ability of the wall to provide weather protection are provided. This chapter
also requires exterior walls that are close to lot lines, or that are bearing walls for certain types of construction, to comply with the
minimum fire-resistance ratings specified in Chapters 6 and 7. The installation of each type of wall covering, be it wood, masonry,
vinyl, metal composite material or an exterior insulation and finish system, is critical to its long-term performance in protecting the
interior of the building from the elements and the spread of fire. Special attention to the use of combustible materials on the exterior
of the building such as balconies, eaves, decks and architectural trim is the focus of Section 1406.
Chapter 15 Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures. Chapter 15 provides standards for both roof assemblies as well as struc-
tures which sit on top of the roof of buildings. The criteria address roof construction and covering which includes the weather-pro-
tective barrier at the roof and, in most circumstances, a fire-resistant barrier. The chapter is prescriptive in nature and is based on
decades of experience with various traditional materials. These prescriptive rules are very important for satisfying performance of
one type of roof covering or another. Section 1509 addresses rooftop structures including penthouses, tanks, towers and spires.
Rooftop penthouses larger than prescribed in this chapter must be treated as a story under Chapter 5.
Chapter 16 Structural Design. Chapter 16 prescribes minimum structural loading requirements for use in the design and construc-
tion of buildings and structural components. It includes minimum design loads, as well as permitted design methodologies. Stan-
dards are provided for minimum design loads (live, dead, snow, wind, rain, flood and earthquake as well as load combinations). The
application of these loads and adherence to the serviceability criteria will enhance the protection of life and property. The chapter
references and relies on many nationally recognized design standards. A key standard is the American Society of Civil Engineer’s
Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures (ASCE 7). Structural design needs to address the conditions of the site
and location. Therefore maps of rainfall, seismic, snow and wind criteria in different regions are provided.
Chapter 17 Structural Tests and Special Inspections. Chapter 17 provides a variety of procedures and criteria for testing materi-
als and assemblies, for labeling materials and assemblies, and for special inspection of structural assemblies. This chapter expands
on the requirements of Chapter 1 regarding the roles and responsibilities of the building official regarding approval of building com-
ponents. It also provides additional duties and responsibilities for the owner, contractor, design professionals and special inspectors.
Proper assembly of structural components, proper quality of materials used, and proper application of materials are essential to
ensuring that a building, once constructed, complies with the structural and fire-resistance minimums of the code and the approved
design. To determine this compliance often requires continuous or frequent inspection and testing. Chapter 17 establishes these spe-
cial inspection and testing standards as well as reporting of the work to the building official.
Chapter 18 Soils and Foundations. Chapter 18 contains minimum requirements for design, construction and resistance to water
intrusion of foundation systems for buildings and other structures. It provides criteria for the geotechnical and structural consider-
ations in the selection and installation of adequate support for the loads transferred from the structure above. The uncertainties of
foundation construction make it extremely difficult to address every potential failure within the text of the code. The chapter
includes requirements for soils investigation and site preparation for receiving a foundation including the allowed load-bearing val-
ues for soils and for protecting the foundation from water intrusion. Section 1808 addresses the basic requirements for all founda-
tion types. Later sections address foundation requirements that are specific to shallow foundations and deep foundations. Due care

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

ix

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

must be exercised in the planning and design of foundation systems based on obtaining sufficient soils information, the use of
accepted engineering procedures, experience and good technical judgment.
Chapter 19 Concrete. This chapter provides minimum accepted practices to the design and construction of buildings and structural
components using concrete—both plain and reinforced. Chapter 19 is formatted to parallel American Concrete Institute (ACI) 318,
Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete. The chapter also includes references to additional standards. Structural con-
crete must be designed and constructed to comply with this code and all listed standards. There are specific sections of the chapter
addressing concrete slabs, anchorage to concrete, shotcrete, reinforced gypsum concrete and concrete-filled pipe columns. Because
of the variable properties of material and numerous design and construction options available in the uses of concrete, due care and
control throughout the construction process is necessary.
Chapter 20 Aluminum. Chapter 20 contains standards for the use of aluminum in building construction. Only the structural appli-
cations of aluminum are addressed. The chapter does not address the use of aluminum in specialty products such as storefront or
window framing or architectural hardware. The use of aluminum in heating, ventilating or air-conditioning systems is addressed in
the International Mechanical Code (IMC). The chapter references national standards from the Aluminum Association for use of
aluminum in building construction, AA ASM 35, Aluminum Sheet Metal Work in Building Construction, and AA ADM 1, Alumi-
num Design Manual . By utilizing the standards set forth, a proper application of this material can be obtained.
Chapter 21 Masonry. This chapter provides comprehensive and practical requirements for masonry construction. The provisions
of Chapter 21 require minimum accepted practices and the use of standards for the design and construction of masonry structures.
The provisions address: material specifications and test methods; types of wall construction; criteria for engineered and empirical
designs; required details of construction including the execution of construction. Masonry design methodologies including allow-
able stress design, strength design and empirical design are covered by provisions of the chapter. Also addressed are masonry fire-
places and chimneys, masonry heaters and glass unit masonry. Fire-resistant construction using masonry is also required to comply
with Chapter 7.  Masonry foundations are also subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.
Chapter 22 Steel. Chapter 22 provides the requirements necessary for the design and construction of structural steel (including
composite construction), cold-formed steel, steel joists, steel cable structures and steel storage racks. The chapter specifies appro-
priate design and construction standards for these types of structures. It also provides a road map of the applicable technical require-
ments for steel structures. Steel is a noncombustible building material commonly associated with Types I and II construction;
however, it is permitted to be used in all types of construction. The code requires that materials used in the design of structural steel
members conform to designated national standards. Chapter 22 is involved with the design and use of steel materials using the speci-
fications and standards of the American Institute for Steel Construction, the American Iron and Steel Institute, the Steel Joist Insti-
tute and the American Society of Civil Engineers.
Chapter 23 Wood. This chapter provides minimum guidance for the design of buildings and structures that use wood and
wood-based products in their framing and fabrication. The chapter is organized around three design methodologies: allowable
stress design (ASD), load and resistance-factor design (LRFD) and conventional light-frame construction. Included in the chapter
are references to design and manufacturing standards for various wood and wood-based products; general construction require-
ments; design criteria for lateral-force-resisting systems and specific requirements for the application of the three design methods.
In general, only Type III, IV or V buildings may be constructed of wood. Accordingly Chapter 23 is referenced when the combina-
tion of the occupancy (determined in Chapter 3) and the height and area of the building (determined in Chapter 5) indicate that con-
struction can be Type III, IV or V.
Chapter 24 Glass and Glazing. This chapter establishes regulations for glass and glazing used in buildings and structures that,
when installed, are subjected to wind, snow and dead loads. Engineering and design requirements are included in the chapter. Addi-
tional structural requirements are found in Chapter 16. A second concern of this chapter is glass and glazing used in areas where it is
likely to have an impact on the occupants. Section 2406 identifies hazardous locations where glazing installed must either be safety
glazing or blocked to prevent human impact. Safety glazing must meet stringent standards and be appropriately marked or identi-
fied. Additional standards for glass and glazing in guards, handrails, elevator hoistways and elevator cars, and in athletic facilities
are provided.
Chapter 25 Gypsum Board and Plaster. Chapter 25 contains the provisions and referenced standards that regulate the design,
construction and quality of gypsum board and plaster. These represent the most common interior and exterior finish materials in the
building industry. This chapter primarily addresses quality-control-related issues with regard to material specifications and installa-
tion requirements. Most products are manufactured under the control of industry standards. The building official or inspector pri-
marily needs to verify that the appropriate product is used and properly installed for the intended use and location. While often
simply used as wall and ceiling coverings, proper design and application are necessary to provide weather resistance and required
fire protection for both structural and nonstructural building components.
Chapter 26 Plastic. The use of plastics in building construction and components is addressed in Chapter 26. This chapter provides
standards addressing foam plastic insulation, foam plastics used as interior finish and trim, and other plastic veneers used on the

x

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

inside or outside of a building. Plastic siding is regulated by Chapter 14. Sections 2606 through 2611 address the use of light-trans-
mitting plastics in various configurations such as walls, roof panels, skylights, signs and as glazing. Requirements for the use of
fiber reinforced polymers, fiberglass reinforced polymers and reflective plastic core insulation are also contained in this chapter.
Some plastics exhibit rapid flame spread and heavy smoke density characteristics when exposed to fire. Additionally, exposure to
the heat generated by a fire can cause some plastics to deform, which can affect their performance. The requirements and limitations
of this chapter are necessary to control the use of plastic and foam plastic products such that they do not compromise the safety of
building occupants.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Since electrical systems and components are an integral part of almost all structures, it is necessary for the
code to address the installation of such systems. For this purpose, Chapter 27 references the National Electrical Code (NEC). In
addition, Section 2702 addresses emergency and standby power requirements. Such systems must comply with the International
Fire Code (IFC) and referenced standards. This section also provides references to the various code sections requiring emergency
and standby power, such as high-rise buildings and buildings containing hazardous materials.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Nearly all buildings will include mechanical systems. This chapter provides references to the
International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) for the design and installation of mechanical
systems. In addition, the chapter references Chapter 21 of the IBC for masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Chapter 29 regulates the minimum number of plumbing fixtures that must be provided for every
type of building. This chapter also regulates the location of the required fixtures in various types of buildings and the construction of
toilet rooms. This section requires separate facilities for males and females except for certain types of small occupancies. The regu-
lations in this chapter come directly from Chapters 3 and 4 of the International Plumbing Code (IPC).
Chapter 30 Elevators and Conveying Systems. Chapter 30 provides standards for the installation of elevators into buildings. Ref-
erenced standards provide the requirements for the elevator system and mechanisms. Detailed standards are provided in the chapter
for hoistway enclosures, hoistway venting and machine rooms. New provisions are added in the 2009 IBC for Fire Service Access
Elevators required in high-rise buildings and for the optional choice of Occupant Evacuation Elevators (see Section 403).
Chapter 31 Special Construction. Chapter 31 contains a collection of regulations for a variety of unique structures and architec-
tural features. Pedestrian walkways and tunnels connecting two buildings are addressed in Section 3104. Membrane and air-sup-
ported structures are addressed by Section 3102. Safeguards for swimming pool safety are found in Section 3109. Standards for
temporary structures, including permit requirements are provided in Section 3103. Structures as varied as awnings, marquees,
signs, telecommunication and broadcast towers and automatic vehicular gates are also addressed (see Sections 3105 through 3108
and 3110).
Chapter 32 Encroachments into the Public Right-of-way. Buildings and structures from time to time are designed to extend over
a property line and into the public right-of-way. Local regulations outside of the building code usually set limits to such encroach-
ments, and such regulations take precedence over the provisions of this chapter. Standards are provided for encroachments below
grade for structural support, vaults and areaways. Encroachments above grade are divided into below 8 feet, 8 feet to 15 feet, and
above 15 feet, because of headroom and vehicular height issues. This includes steps, columns, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs,
windows, balconies. Similar architectural features above grade are also addressed. Pedestrian walkways must also comply with
Chapter 31.
Chapter 33 Safeguards During Construction. Chapter 33 provides safety requirements during construction and demolition of
buildings and structures. These requirements are intended to protect the public from injury and adjoining property from damage. In
addition the chapter provides for the progressive installation and operation of exit stairways and standpipe systems during construc-
tion.
Chapter 34 Existing Structures. The provisions in Chapter 34 deal with alternative methods or reduced compliance requirements
when dealing with existing building constraints. This chapter allows for a controlled departure from full compliance with the techni-
cal codes, without compromising the minimum standards for fire prevention and life safety features of the rehabilitated building.
Provisions are divided by addition, alterations, repairs, change of occupancy and moved structures. There are further allowances for
registered historic buildings. There are also special allowances for replacement of existing stairways, replacement of glass and
accessibility requirements. The fire escape requirements in Section 3406 are consistent with the fire escape requirements in Section
1030 of the International Fire Code (IFC).
Section 3412, Compliance Alternatives, allows for existing buildings to be evaluated so as to show that alterations, while not
meeting new construction requirements, will improve the current existing situation. Provisions are based on a numerical scoring
system involving 18 various safety parameters and the degree of code compliance for each issue.
Chapter 34 is repeated in the International Existing Building Code (IEBC). Sections 3402 through 3409 are repeated as IEBC
Chapter 3 and Section 3410 as Chapter 13.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xi

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Chapter 35 Referenced Standards. The code contains numerous references to standards that are used to regulate materials and
methods of construction. Chapter 35 contains a comprehensive list of all standards that are referenced in the code, including the
appendices. The standards are part of the code to the extent of the reference to the standard (see Section 102.4). Compliance with the
referenced standard is necessary for compliance with this code. By providing specifically adopted standards, the construction and
installation requirements necessary for compliance with the code can be readily determined. The basis for code compliance is,
therefore, established and available on an equal basis to the building code official, contractor, designer and owner.
Chapter 35 is organized in a manner that makes it easy to locate specific standards. It lists all of the referenced standards, alpha-
betically, by acronym of the promulgating agency of the standard. Each agency’s standards are then listed in either alphabetical or
numeric order based upon the standard identification. The list also contains the title of the standard; the edition (date) of the standard
referenced; any addenda included as part of the ICC adoption; and the section or sections of this code that reference the standard.
Appendices. Appendices are provided in the IBC to offer optional or supplemental criteria to the provisions in the main chapters of
the code. Appendices provide additional information for administration of the Department of Building Safety as well as standards
not typically administered by all building departments. Appendices have the same force and effect as the first 35 chapters of the IBC
only when explicitly adopted by the jurisdiction.
Appendix A Employee Qualifications. Effective administration and enforcement of the family of International Codes depends on
the training and expertise of the personnel employed by the jurisdiction and his or her knowledge of the codes. Section 103 of the
code establishes the Department of Building Safety and calls for the appointment of a building official and deputies such as plans
examiners and inspectors. Appendix A provides standards for experience, training and certification for the building official and the
other staff mentioned in Chapter 1.
Appendix B Board of Appeals. Section 112 of Chapter 1 requires the establishment of a board of appeals to hear appeals regarding
determinations made by the building official. Appendix B provides qualification standards for members of the board as well as
operational procedures of such board.
Appendix C Group U–Agricultural Buildings. Appendix C provides a more liberal set of standards for the construction of agri-
cultural buildings, rather than strictly following the Utility building provision, reflective of their specific usage and limited occupant
load. The provisions of the appendix, when adopted, allow reasonable heights and areas commensurate with the risk of agricultural
buildings.
Appendix D Fire Districts. Fire districts have been a tool used to limit conflagration hazards in areas of a city with intense and con-
centrated development. More frequently used under the model codes which preceded the International Building Code (IBC), the
appendix is provided to allow jurisdictions to continue the designation and use of fire districts. Fire District standards restrict certain
occupancies within the district, as well as setting higher minimum construction standards.
Appendix E Supplemental Accessibility Requirements. The Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (U.S.
Access Board) has revised and updated its accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities covered by the Americans with Dis-
abilities Act (ADA) and the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA). Appendix E includes scoping requirements contained in the new
ADA/ABA Accessibility Guidelines that are not in Chapter 11 and not otherwise mentioned or mainstreamed throughout the code.
Items in the appendix deal with subjects not typically addressed in building codes (e.g., beds, room signage, transportation facili-
ties).
Appendix F Rodentproofing. The provisions of this appendix are minimum mechanical methods to prevent the entry of rodents
into a building. These standards, when used in conjunction with cleanliness and maintenance programs, can significantly reduce the
potential of rodents invading a building.
Appendix G Flood-resistant Construction. Appendix G is intended to fulfill the flood-plain management and administrative
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that are not included in the code. Communities that adopt the Inter-
national Building Code (IBC) and Appendix G will meet the minimum requirements of NFIP as set forth in Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
Appendix H Signs. Appendix H gathers in one place the various code standards that regulate the construction and protection of out-
door signs. Whenever possible, the appendix provides standards in performance language, thus allowing the widest possible appli-
cation.
Appendix I Patio Covers. Appendix I provides standards applicable to the construction and use of patio covers. It is limited in
application to patio covers accessory to dwelling units. Covers of patios and other outdoor areas associated with restaurants, mer-
cantile buildings, offices, nursing homes or other nondwelling occupancies would be subject to standards in the main code and not
this appendix.
Appendix J Grading. Appendix J provides standards for the grading of properties. The appendix also provides standards for
administration and enforcement of a grading program including permit and inspection requirements. Appendix J was originally

xii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

developed in the 1960s and used for many years in jurisdictions throughout the western states. It is intended to provide consistent
and uniform code requirements anywhere grading is considered an issue.
Appendix K Administrative Provisions. Appendix K primarily provides administrative provisions for jurisdictions adopting and
enforcing NFPA 70—the National Electrical Code (NEC). The provisions contained in this appendix are compatible with adminis-
trative and enforcement provisions contained in Chapter 1 of the IBC and the other International Codes. Annex H of NFPA 70 also
contains administrative provisions for the NEC; however, some of its provisions are not compatible with IBC Chapter 1. Section
K110 also contains technical provisions that are unique to this appendix and are in addition to technical standards of NFPA 70.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xiii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xiv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION . . . . 1

312

Utility and Miscellaneous Group U . . . . . . . . . . . 36

PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Section
101
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
102
Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Department of Building Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Duties and Powers of Building Official . . . . . . . . . 2
Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Floor and Roof Design Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Submittal Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Temporary Structures and Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Certificate of Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Service Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Violations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Stop Work Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Unsafe Structures and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116

CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Section
201
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
202
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

CHAPTER 3 USE AND OCCUPANCY
CLASSIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

Section
301
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
302
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
303
Assembly Group A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
304
Business Group B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
305
Educational Group E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
306
Factory Group F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
307
High-hazard Group H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
308
Institutional Group I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
309 Mercantile Group M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
310
Residential Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
311
Storage Group S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

CHAPTER 4 SPECIAL DETAILED
REQUIREMENTS BASED ON
USE AND OCCUPANCY . . . . . . . . . . 37

Section
401
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
402
Covered Mall and Open Mall Buildings . . . . . . . 37
403
High-rise Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
404
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
405
Underground Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
406 Motor-vehicle-related Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . 45
407
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
408
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
409 Motion Picture Projection Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
410
Stages and Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
411
Special Amusement Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
412
Aircraft-related Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
413
Combustible Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
414
Hazardous Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
415
Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 . . . . . . . . . . 62
416
Application of Flammable Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . 74
417
Drying Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
418
Organic Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
419
Live/work Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
420
Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
421
Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
422
Ambulatory Health Care Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
423
Storm Shelters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

CHAPTER 5 GENERAL BUILDING
HEIGHTS AND AREAS . . . . . . . . . . . 79

Section
501
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
502
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
503
General Building Height and Area Limitations . . 79
504
Building Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
505 Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
506
Building Area Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
507
Unlimited Area Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
508 Mixed Use and Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
509
Special Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xvii

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:00 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 6 TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . 89
Section
601
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
602
Construction Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
603
Combustible Material in
Type I and II Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

CHAPTER 7 FIRE AND SMOKE
PROTECTION FEATURES . . . . . . . . 93

Section
701
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
702
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
703
Fire-resistance Ratings and Fire Tests . . . . . . . . . 94
704
Fire-resistance Rating of
Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Exterior Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Fire Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Fire Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Shaft Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Fire Partitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Smoke Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Smoke Partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Horizontal Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Fire-resistant Joint Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Opening Protectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Ducts and Air Transfer Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Concealed Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Fire-resistance Requirements for Plaster . . . . . . 124
Thermal- and Sound-insulating Materials . . . . . 124
Prescriptive Fire Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Calculated Fire Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

705
706
707
708
709
710
711
712
713
714
715
716
717
718
719
720
721

INTERIOR FINISHES . . . . . . . . . . . 175

CHAPTER 8
Section
801
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
802
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
803 Wall and Ceiling Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
804
Interior Floor Finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
805
Combustible Materials in Type I
and II Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Decorative Materials and Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Acoustical Ceiling Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

806
807
808

CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS . . . 181
Section
901
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
902
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
903
Automatic Sprinkler Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
904
Alternative Automatic
Fire-extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
Standpipe Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Portable Fire Extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Fire Alarm and Detection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . 194
Emergency Alarm Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Smoke Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Smoke and Heat Vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Fire Command Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
Fire Department Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
Fire Pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
Emergency Responder Safety Features . . . . . . . 215
Emergency Responder Radio Coverage . . . . . . . 215

905
906
907
908
909
910
911
912
913
914
915

CHAPTER 10 MEANS OF EGRESS . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Section
1001 Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
1002 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
1003 General Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
1004 Occupant Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
1005 Egress Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
1006 Means of Egress Illumination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
1007 Accessible Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
1008 Doors, Gates and Turnstiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
1009 Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
1010 Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
1011 Exit Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
1012 Handrails . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
1013 Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
1014 Exit Access. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
1015 Exit and Exit Access Doorways . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
1016 Exit Access Travel Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
1017 Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
1018 Corridors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
1019 Egress Balconies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242
1020 Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
1021 Number of Exits and Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
1022 Exit Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
1023 Exit Passageways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
1024 Luminous Egress Path Markings . . . . . . . . . . . . 246

xviii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:01 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1025 Horizontal Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
1026 Exterior Exit Ramps and Stairways . . . . . . . . . . 248
1027 Exit Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
1028 Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
1029 Emergency Escape and Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254

CHAPTER 11 ACCESSIBILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Section
1101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1103 Scoping Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1104 Accessible Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
1105 Accessible Entrances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
1106 Parking and Passenger Loading Facilities . . . . . 260
1107 Dwelling Units and Sleeping Units . . . . . . . . . . 260
1108 Special Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
1109 Other Features and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
1110 Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269

CHAPTER 12 INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT . . . . . 271
Section
1201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1202 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1203 Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1204 Temperature Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
1205 Lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
1206 Yards or Courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1207 Sound Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1208 Interior Space Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1209 Access to Unoccupied Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
1210 Surrounding Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274

CHAPTER 13 ENERGY EFFICIENCY . . . . . . . . . . 275
Section
1301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275

CHAPTER 14 EXTERIOR WALLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
Section
1401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1403 Performance Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1404 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
1405 Installation of Wall Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
1406 Combustible Materials on the
Exterior Side of Exterior Walls . . . . . . . . . . . 283
1407 Metal Composite Materials (MCM) . . . . . . . . . . 284

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1408 Exterior Insulation and
Finish Systems (EIFS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285

CHAPTER 15 ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . 287

Section
1501 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1502 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1503 Weather Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1504 Performance Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
1505 Fire Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
1506 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
1507 Requirements for Roof Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . 290
1508 Roof Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
1509 Rooftop Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
1510 Reroofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301

CHAPTER 16 STRUCTURAL DESIGN . . . . . . . . . 303
Section
1601 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
1602 Definitions and Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
1603 Construction Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
1604 General Design Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
1605 Load Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
1606 Dead Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
1607 Live Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
1608 Snow Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
1609 Wind Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
1610 Soil Lateral Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 331
1611 Rain Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
1612 Flood Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
1613 Earthquake Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
1614 Structural Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345

CHAPTER 17 STRUCTURAL TESTS AND
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS . . . . . . . . 367

Section
1701 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1702 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1703 Approvals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1704 Special Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
1705 Statement of Special Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
1706 Special Inspections for Wind Requirements . . . 381
1707 Special Inspections for Seismic Resistance . . . . 381
1708 Structural Testing for Seismic Resistance . . . . . 382
1709 Contractor Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xix

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:01 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1710 Structural Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1711 Design Strengths of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1712 Alternative Test Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1713 Test Safe Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1714 In-situ Load Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1715 Preconstruction Load Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1716 Material and Test Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385

CHAPTER 18 SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS . . . . . 387
Section
1801 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1802 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1803 Geotechnical Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1804 Excavation, Grading and Fill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
1805 Dampproofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . 390
1806 Presumptive Load-bearing Values of Soils . . . . 391
1807 Foundation Walls, Retaining Walls and
Embedded Posts and Poles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
1808 Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
1809 Shallow Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402
1810 Deep Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403

CHAPTER 19 CONCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
Section
1901 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1902 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1903 Specifications for Tests and Materials . . . . . . . . 417
1904 Durability Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1905 Concrete Quality, Mixing and Placing . . . . . . . . 419
1906 Formwork, Embedded Pipes and
Construction Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1907 Details of Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1908 Modifications to ACI 318 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1909 Structural Plain Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
1910 Minimum Slab Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
1911 Anchorage to Concrete—Allowable
Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424
1912 Anchorage to Concrete—Strength Design . . . . . 424
1913 Shotcrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 425
1914 Reinforced Gypsum Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
1915 Concrete-filled Pipe Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426

CHAPTER 21 MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
Section
2101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
2102 Definitions and Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
2103 Masonry Construction Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . 432
2104 Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 433
2105 Quality Assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
2106 Seismic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
2107 Allowable Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
2108 Strength Design of Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436
2109 Empirical Design of Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436
2110 Glass Unit Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
2111 Masonry Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
2112 Masonry Heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 440
2113 Masonry Chimneys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441

CHAPTER 22 STEEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
Section
2201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2202 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2203 Identification and Protection of Steel
for Structural Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2204 Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2205 Structural Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2206 Steel Joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448
2207 Steel Cable Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2208 Steel Storage Racks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2209 Cold-formed Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2210 Cold-formed Steel Light-frame Construction . . 449

CHAPTER 23 WOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
Section
2301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
2302 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
2303 Minimum Standards and Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . 452
2304 General Construction Requirements . . . . . . . . . . 456
2305 General Design Requirements for
Lateral-force-resisting Systems . . . . . . . . . . . 466
2306 Allowable Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 468
2307 Load and Resistance Factor Design . . . . . . . . . . 469
2308 Conventional Light-frame Construction . . . . . . 469

CHAPTER 20 ALUMINUM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
Section
2001 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
2002 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427

CHAPTER 24 GLASS AND GLAZING . . . . . . . . . . 521
Section
2401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521

xx

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:02 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2403 General Requirements for Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2404 Wind, Snow, Seismic and
Dead Loads on Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2405 Sloped Glazing and Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 523
2406 Safety Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 524
2407 Glass in Handrails and Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
2408 Glazing in Athletic Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
2409 Glass in Elevator Hoistways and
Elevator Cars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527

CHAPTER 25 GYPSUM BOARD
AND PLASTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529

Section
2501 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2502 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2503 Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2504 Vertical and Horizontal Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . 529
2505 Shear Wall Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2506 Gypsum Board Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2507 Lathing and Plastering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2508 Gypsum Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2509 Gypsum Board in Showers and
Water Closets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 531
2510 Lathing and Furring for Cement
Plaster (Stucco) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
2511 Interior Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
2512 Exterior Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533
2513 Exposed Aggregate Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533

CHAPTER 26 PLASTIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
Section
2601 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2602 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2603 Foam Plastic Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2604 Interior Finish and Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 538
2605 Plastic Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 539
2606 Light-transmitting Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 539
2607 Light-transmitting Plastic Wall Panels . . . . . . . . 540
2608 Light-transmitting Plastic Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . 541
2609 Light-transmitting Plastic Roof Panels . . . . . . . 541
2610 Light-transmitting Plastic Skylight Glazing . . . 542
2611 Light-transmitting Plastic Interior Signs . . . . . . 542
2612 Fiber Reinforced Polymer and
Fiberglass-reinforced Polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
2613 Reflective Plastic Core Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . 544

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 27 ELECTRICAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
Section
2701 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2702 Emergency and Standby Power Systems . . . . . . 545

CHAPTER 28 MECHANICAL SYSTEMS . . . . . . . 547
Section
2801 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 547

CHAPTER 29 PLUMBING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . 549
Section
2901 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
2902 Minimum Plumbing Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
2903 Toilet Room Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 552

CHAPTER 30 ELEVATORS AND
CONVEYING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . 553

Section
3001 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3002 Hoistway Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3003 Emergency Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3004 Hoistway Venting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
3005 Conveying Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
3006 Machine Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3007 Fire Service Access Elevator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3008 Occupant Evacuation Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . 556

CHAPTER 31 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . 559
Section
3101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
3102 Membrane Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
3103 Temporary Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
3104 Pedestrian Walkways and Tunnels . . . . . . . . . . . 560
3105 Awnings and Canopies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 561
3106 Marquees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3107 Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3108 Telecommunication and Broadcast Towers . . . . 562
3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and
Safety Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3110 Automatic Vehicular Gates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 563

CHAPTER 32 ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY . . . . . . . . 565

Section
3201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 565
3202 Encroachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 565

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xxi

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:02 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 33 SAFEGUARDS DURING
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567

APPENDIX C GROUP U—AGRICULTURAL
BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611

Section
3301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3302 Construction Safeguards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3303 Demolition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3304 Site Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3305 Sanitary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3306 Protection of Pedestrians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 568
3307 Protection of Adjoining Property . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3308 Temporary Use of Streets, Alleys and
Public Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3309 Fire Extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3310 Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3311 Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3312 Automatic Sprinkler System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 570

CHAPTER 34 EXISTING STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . 571
Section
3401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
3402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
3403 Additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 572
3404 Alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 572
3405 Repairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 573
3406 Fire Escapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 574
3407 Glass Replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3408 Change of Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3409 Historic Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3410 Moved Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3411 Accessibility for Existing Buildings . . . . . . . . . 575
3412 Compliance Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 577

CHAPTER 35 REFERENCED STANDARDS . . . . . 587

APPENDIX A EMPLOYEE
QUALIFICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607

Section
A101 Building Official Qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607
A102 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607

APPENDIX B BOARD OF APPEALS . . . . . . . . . . . 609
Section
B101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 609

Section
C101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C102 Allowable Height and Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C103 Mixed Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C104 Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611

APPENDIX D FIRE DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
Section
D101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
D102 Building Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
D103 Changes to Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
D104 Buildings Located Partially in the
Fire District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
D105 Exceptions to Restrictions in Fire District . . . . . 614
D106 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 615

APPENDIX E SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617

Section
E101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E103 Accessible Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E104 Special Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E105 Other Features and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
E106 Telephones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
E107 Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 619
E108 Bus Stops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 620
E109 Transportation Facilities and Stations . . . . . . . . 620
E110 Airports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 621
E111 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 621

APPENDIX F RODENTPROOFING . . . . . . . . . . . . 623
Section
F101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 623

APPENDIX G FLOOD-RESISTANT
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625

Section
G101 Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G102 Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G103 Powers and Duties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G104 Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626
G105 Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626

xxii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

6

TABLE OF CONTENTS

J107 Fills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J108 Setbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J109 Drainage and Terracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640
J110 Erosion Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640
J111 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640

APPENDIX K ADMINISTRATIVE
PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641

Section
K101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K102 Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K103 Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K104 Construction Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K105 Alternative Engineered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K106 Required Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K107 Prefabricated Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K108 Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K109 Reconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K110 Condemning Electrical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K111 Electrical Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643

INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 645

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

G201 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 627
G301 Subdivisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G401 Site Improvement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G501 Manufactured Homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G601 Recreational Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G701 Tanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G801 Other Building Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G901 Temporary Structures and
Temporary Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G1001 Utility and Miscellaneous Group U . . . . . . . . . . 629
G1101 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 630

APPENDIX H SIGNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
Section
H101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H103 Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H104 Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H105 Design and Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H106 Electrical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H107 Combustible Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H108 Animated Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H109 Ground Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H110 Roof Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H111 Wall Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H112 Projecting Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H113 Marquee Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634
H114 Portable Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634
H115 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634

APPENDIX I PATIO COVERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
Section
I101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I103 Exterior Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I104 Structural Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635

APPENDIX J GRADING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
Section
J101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J103 Permits Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J104 Permit Application and Submittals . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J105
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J106 Excavations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xxiii

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xxiv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ORDINANCE

The International Codes are designed and promulgated to be adopted by reference by ordinance. Jurisdictions wishing to adopt the
2009 International Building Code as an enforceable regulation governing structures and premises should ensure that certain factual
information is included in the adopting ordinance at the time adoption is being considered by the appropriate governmental body.
The following sample adoption ordinance addresses several key elements of a code adoption ordinance, including the information
required for insertion into the code text.

SAMPLE ORDINANCE FOR ADOPTION OF
THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
ORDINANCE NO.________

An ordinance of the [JURISDICTION] adopting the 2009 edition of the International Building Code, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in the [JURISDIC-
TION]; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; repealing Ordinance No. ______ of the [JURISDICTION]
and all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith.
The [GOVERNING BODY] of the [JURISDICTION] does ordain as follows:
Section 1. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the [TITLE OF JURISDICTION’S KEEPER OF
RECORDS] of [NAME OF JURISDICTION], being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including
Appendix Chapters [FILL IN THE APPENDIX CHAPTERS BEING ADOPTED] (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2009
edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the [JURISDICTION], in
the State of [STATE NAME] for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the
[JURISDICTION] are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, inser-
tions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Section 2. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 1612.3. Insert: [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 1612.3. Insert: [DATE OF ISSUANCE]
Section 3412.2. Insert: [DATE IN ONE LOCATION]

Section 3. That Ordinance No. ______ of [JURISDICTION] entitled [FILL IN HERE THE COMPLETE TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE OR
ORDINANCES IN EFFECT AT THE PRESENT TIME SO THAT THEY WILL BE REPEALED BY DEFINITE MENTION] and all other ordinances

or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 4. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The [GOVERNING BODY] hereby declares that it
would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section 5. That nothing in this ordinance or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of this ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
Section 6. That the [JURISDICTION’S KEEPER OF RECORDS] is hereby ordered and directed to cause this ordinance to be published.
(An additional provision may be required to direct the number of times the ordinance is to be published and to specify that it is to be
in a newspaper in general circulation. Posting may also be required.)
Section 7. That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted
hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect [TIME PERIOD] from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xv

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:52 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xvi

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:52 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 1

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION

SECTION 101
GENERAL

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of [NAME OF JURISDICTION], hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the con-
struction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories above grade plane in height with a sepa-
rate means of egress and their accessory structures shall
comply with the International Residential Code.
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not
apply unless specifically adopted.
101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the mini-
mum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and
general welfare through structural strength, means of egress
facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation,
energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire
and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to
provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders dur-
ing emergency operations.
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections
101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code
shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas
Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the
point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping
systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet
connections of appliances and the installation and operation
of residential and commercial gas appliances and related
accessories.
101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the International
Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations,
repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurte-
nances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-condi-
tioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other
energy-related systems.
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International
Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration,
repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including

➡

equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances,
and where connected to a water or sewage system and all
aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the Inter-
national Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to pri-
vate sewage disposal systems.
101.4.4 Property maintenance. The provisions of the

International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to
existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities;
light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire
safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and struc-
tures.
101.4.5 Fire prevention. The provisions of the Interna-
tional Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating
to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire
and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of
structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous
to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of struc-
tures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm
systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises
from occupancy or operation.
101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy
Conservation Code shall apply to all matters governing the
design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

SECTION 102
APPLICABILITY

102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific require-
ment shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different
sections of this code specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern.
102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be
deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or sec-
tion numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by
number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or
provision of this code.
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and stan-
dards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this
code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision
of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the
effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provi-
sions.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

1

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any struc-
ture existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be per-
mitted to continue without change, except as is specifically
covered in this code, the International Property Maintenance
Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary
by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.

PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of
Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge
thereof shall be known as the building official.
103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed
by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures
of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing
authority, the building official shall have the authority to
appoint a deputy building official, the related technical offi-
cers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such
employees shall have powers as delegated by the building offi-
cial. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the Inter-
national Property Maintenance Code.

SECTION 104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building
official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this
code.
104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall
receive applications, review construction documents and issue
permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving
of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such
permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the pro-
visions of this code.
104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this
code.
104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the
required inspections, or the building official shall have the
authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies
or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary
to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the
approval of the appointing authority.

104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.
104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspec-
tion to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the build-
ing official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or
in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is autho-
rized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided
that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials
be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such struc-
ture or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person
having charge or control of the structure or premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep
official records of applications received, permits and certifi-
cates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices
and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official
records for the period required for retention of public records.
104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of
appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this
code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or
other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of
any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provi-
sions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of
the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.
The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursu-
ance of the provisions of this code.
104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equip-
ment and devices approved by the building official shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used
materials which meet the requirements of this code for new
materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless approved by the building official.
104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficul-
ties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
building official shall have the authority to grant modifications
for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s
representative, provided the building official shall first find that
special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does
not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural
requirements. The details of action granting modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of
building safety.

2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of con-
struction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not
intended to prevent the installation of any material or to pro-
hibit any design or method of construction not specifically pre-
scribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material, design or method of
construction shall be approved where the building official finds
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where neces-
sary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not
specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid
research reports from approved sources.
104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence
that a material or method does not conform to the require-
ments of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternative materials or methods, the building official shall
have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance
to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods
shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the building official shall approve the testing pro-
cedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building offi-
cial for the period required for retention of public records.

SECTION 105
PERMITS

105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends
to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change
the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which
is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done,
shall first make application to the building official and obtain
the required permit.
105.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for
each alteration to an already approved electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing installation, the building official is
authorized to issue an annual permit upon application there-
for to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing
one or more qualified tradepersons in the building, structure
or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for
the permit.

105.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an
annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alter-
ations made under such annual permit. The building official
shall have access to such records at all times or such records
shall be filed with the building official as designated.
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authori-
zation for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as
tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square
feet (11 m2).
2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
3. Oil derricks.
4. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to
the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or
impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the
capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L)
and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2:1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches
(762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any
basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, coun-
ter tops and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group
R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and are
installed entirely above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or
agricultural purposes, not including service sys-
tems.
11. Swings and other playground equipment accessory
to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that
do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from
the exterior wall and do not require additional sup-
port of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.
13. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, coun-
ters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753
mm) in height.
Electrical:
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, includ-
ing the replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved per-
manently installed receptacles.
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provi-
sions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment
used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply
to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the
installations of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be
required for the installation of any temporary system

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

3

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

required for the testing or servicing of electrical equip-
ment or apparatus.
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter
approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating
or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its
approval or make it unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10
pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by
motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed
trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe
becomes defective and it becomes necessary to
remove and replace the same with new material, such
work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in
this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in
pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstal-
lation of water closets, provided such repairs do not
involve or require the replacement or rearrangement
of valves, pipes or fixtures.
105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replace-
ments and repairs must be performed in an emergency situa-
tion, the permit application shall be submitted within the
next working business day to the building official.
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building offi-
cial is not required for ordinary repairs to structures,
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved porta-
ble electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away
of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cut-
ting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rear-
rangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe,
water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste,
vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be
required for the installation, alteration or repair of genera-
tion, transmission, distribution or metering or other related

equipment that is under the ownership and control of public
service agencies by established right.
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the appli-
cant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form
furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose.
Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the per-
mit for which application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done by legal description, street address or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate
the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other
information as required in Section 107.
5. State the valuation of the proposed work.
6. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized
agent.
7. Give such other data and information as required by the
building official.

105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall
examine or cause to be examined applications for permits
and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after fil-
ing. If the application or the construction documents do not
conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building
official shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code
and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building
official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for
a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have
been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such
application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the building official is authorized to
grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods
not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other
ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or
other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issu-
ance of a permit based on construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the
correction of errors in the construction documents and other
data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occu-
pancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of
any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid
unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is com-
menced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work autho-
rized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The

4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each.
The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated.
105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the pro-
visions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or
in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provi-
sions of this code.
105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall
be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the pro-
ject.

SECTION 106
FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS

106.1 Live loads posted. Where the live loads for which each
floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building
is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such
design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in
that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs.
It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices
106.2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of
occupancy required by Section 111 shall not be issued until the
floor load signs, required by Section 106.1, have been installed.
106.3 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or
cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building,
structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by
this code.

SECTION 107
SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS

107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construc-
tion documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical
report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets
with each permit application. The construction documents
shall be prepared by a registered design professional where
required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project
is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the build-
ing official is authorized to require additional construction doc-
uments to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not
required to be prepared by a registered design professional
if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such
that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents
shall be in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5.
107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Con-
struction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon
suitable material. Electronic media documents are permit-
ted to be submitted when approved by the building official.
Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indi-
cate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regula-
tions, as determined by the building official.

107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop draw-
ings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to
indicate conformance to this code and the construction docu-
ments and shall be approved prior to the start of system instal-
lation. Shop drawings shall contain all
information as
required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall
show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and
character of all portions of the means of egress in compli-
ance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupan-
cies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1,
the construction
documents shall designate the number of occupants to be
accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents
for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in
sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code.
The construction documents shall provide details of the
exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, inter-
sections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, con-
trol joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of
drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around
openings.

The construction documents shall
include manufac-
turer’s installation instructions that provide supporting doc-
umentation that the proposed penetration and opening
details described in the construction documents maintain
the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior
wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as
the test procedure used.

107.2.5 Site plan. The construction documents submitted
with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a
site plan showing to scale the size and location of new con-
struction and existing structures on the site, distances from
lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed fin-
ished grades and, as applicable,
flood hazard areas,
floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be
drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey.
In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construc-
tion to be demolished and the location and size of existing
structures and construction that are to remain on the site or
plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify
the requirement for a site plan when the application for per-
mit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

107.2.5.1 Design flood elevations. Where design flood
elevations are not specified, they shall be established in
accordance with Section 1612.3.1.

107.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall
examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal
documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether
the construction indicated and described is in accordance with
the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordi-
nances.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

5

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the

building official issues a permit, the construction documents
shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for
Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other
set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site
of work and shall be open to inspection by the building offi-
cial or a duly authorized representative.

107.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require
changes in the construction documents, construction or des-
ignated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit
has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully autho-
rized, and the construction of which has been pursued in
good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this
code and has not been abandoned.

107.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is autho-
rized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or
any other part of a building or structure before the construc-
tion documents for the whole building or structure have
been submitted, provided that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with perti-
nent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit
for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure
shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building oper-
ation and without assurance that a permit for the entire
structure will be granted.

107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.

107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents
be prepared by a registered design professional, the
building official shall be authorized to require the owner
to engage and designate on the building permit applica-
tion a registered design professional who shall act as the
registered design professional in responsible charge. If
the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a
substitute registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required of the origi-
nal registered design professional in responsible charge.
The building official shall be notified in writing by the
owner if the registered design professional in responsible
charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the
duties.

The registered design professional in responsible
charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinat-
ing submittal documents prepared by others, including
phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility
with the design of the building.

107.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this
section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions
of the design that are not submitted at the time of the
application and that are to be submitted to the building
official within a specified period.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior
approval of the building official. The registered design
professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred
submittals on the construction documents for review by
the building official.

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be sub-
mitted to the registered design professional in responsi-
ble charge who shall review them and forward them to
the building official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and
found to be in general conformance to the design of the
building. The deferred submittal items shall not be
installed until the deferred submittal documents have
been approved by the building official.

107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be
installed in accordance with the approved construction docu-
ments, and any changes made during construction that are not
in compliance with the approved construction documents shall
be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.

107.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of

approved construction documents shall be retained by the
building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date
of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or
local laws.

SECTION 108
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a
permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such per-
mits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be per-
mitted for more than 180 days. The building official is
authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
108.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall con-
form to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress,
accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of
this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and gen-
eral welfare.
108.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to
give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of
an electric installation before such installation has been fully
completed and the final certificate of completion has been
issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall
comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting,
heat or power in NFPA 70.
108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is autho-
rized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use
and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

SECTION 109
FEES

109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the
fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment
to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been
paid.
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, elec-
trical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the
applicable governing authority.

6

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit
shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application.
Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including
materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such
as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and perma-
nent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valu-
ation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be
denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to
meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit
valuation shall be set by the building official.

109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person
who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the neces-
sary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building
official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construc-
tion, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in
connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a
building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the
permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by
law.

109.6 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish
a refund policy.

SECTION 110
INSPECTIONS

110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the building official
and such construction or work shall remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a
result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordi-
nances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of
other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be
the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required
to allow inspection.

110.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the
building official is authorized to examine or cause to be exam-
ined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has
been filed.

110.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon noti-
fication, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections
110.3.1 through 110.3.10.

110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and
foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for
footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is
in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall
be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation
shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in
accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on
the job.

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Con-
crete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after
in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service
equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is
placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon
placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and
prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certifica-
tion required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the
building official.

110.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be
made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing,
fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys
and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough elec-
trical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are
approved.

110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and
gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and
gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before
any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasten-
ers are taped and finished.

Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resis-
tance-rated assembly or a shear assembly.

110.3.6 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations. Protec-
tion of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated
assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not
be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

110.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall
be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall
include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope
insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value, duct sys-
tem R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment effi-
ciency.

110.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections
specified above, the building official is authorized to make
or require other inspections of any construction work to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and
other laws that are enforced by the department of building
safety.

110.3.9 Special inspections. For special inspections, see
Section 1704.

110.3.10 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be
made after all work required by the building permit is com-
pleted.

110.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized
to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided
such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and
reliability.

110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of
the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the
building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be
the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for
inspections of such work that are required by this code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

7

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:16 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the
point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining the approval of the building official. The building
official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections
and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or
her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any
portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion
shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the build-
ing official.

building official shall set a time period during which the tempo-
rary certificate of occupancy is valid.
111.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in
writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or com-
pletion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the
certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect infor-
mation supplied, or where it is determined that the building or
structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

SECTION 111
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be
used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall
be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a viola-
tion of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction.
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for
work exempt from permits under Section 105.2.
111.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects
the building or structure and finds no violations of the provi-
sions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the depart-
ment of building safety, the building official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy that contains the following:
1. The building permit number.
2. The address of the structure.
3. The name and address of the owner.
4. A description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate is issued.
5. A statement that the described portion of the structure
has been inspected for compliance with the require-
ments of this code for the occupancy and division of
occupancy and the use for which the proposed occu-
pancy is classified.
6. The name of the building official.
7. The edition of the code under which the permit was
issued.
8. The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provi-
sions of Chapter 3.
9. The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.
10. The design occupant load.
11. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether
the sprinkler system is required.
12. Any special stipulations and conditions of the building
permit.
111.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is autho-
rized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the
completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided
that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The

SECTION 112
SERVICE UTILITIES
112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make
connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to
any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a
permit is required, until released by the building official.
112.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have
the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the
building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.
112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building
official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by
this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in
Section 101.4 in case of emergency where necessary to elimi-
nate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such util-
ity connection has been made without the approval required by
Section 112.1 or 112.2. The building official shall notify the
serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant
of the building, structure or service system of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to
disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure
or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practi-
cal thereafter.

SECTION 113
BOARD OF APPEALS

113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the building official rela-
tive to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall
be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of
appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing author-
ity and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt
rules of procedure for conducting its business.
113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly inter-
preted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an
equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The
board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
113.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass
on matters pertaining to building construction and are not
employees of the jurisdiction.

8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:16 AM

8

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

tilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dan-
gerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve ille-
gal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken
down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems
necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure
that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
116.2 Record. The building official shall cause a report to be
filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occu-
pancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
116.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building offi-
cial shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the
structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed
unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be
made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe
structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to
the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the
order.
116.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed prop-
erly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner per-
sonally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the
owner at the last known address with the return receipt
requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by
local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure
shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
116.5 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to
be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a
safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or addi-
tions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the res-
toration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or
change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of
Section 105.2.2 and Chapter 34.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 114
VIOLATIONS

114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equip-
ment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in con-
flict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
114.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to
serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible
for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair,
moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in viola-
tion of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal
action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation
of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto.
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provi-
sion of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or
structure in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to pen-
alties as prescribed by law.

SECTION 115
STOP WORK ORDER

115.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any
work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either
contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe,
the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the
owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance
of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease.
The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume.
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to pen-
alties as prescribed by law.

SECTION 116
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or
hereafter become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of
inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ven-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

9

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:17 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

10

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:17 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 2

DEFINITIONS

SECTION 201
GENERAL

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the
meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes
the plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not
defined in this code and are defined in the International Fuel
Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical
Code or International Plumbing Code, such terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined
through the methods authorized by this section, such terms
shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.

SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS

AAC MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
ACCESSIBLE. See Section 1102.1.
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS. See Section 1002.1.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE. See Section 1102.1.
ACCESSIBLE UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
ACCREDITATION BODY. See Section 2302.1.
ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height
of a building or structure.
ADHERED MASONRY VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
ADOBE CONSTRUCTION. See Section 2102.1.
Adobe, stabilized. See Section 2102.1.
Adobe, unstabilized. See Section 2102.1.
[F] AEROSOL. See Section 307.2.
Level 1 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
Level 2 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
Level 3 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
[F] AEROSOL CONTAINER. See Section 307.2.
AGGREGATE. See Section 1502.1.
AGRICULTURAL, BUILDING. A structure designed and
constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, live-
stock or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be
a place of human habitation or a place of employment where
agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor
shall it be a place used by the public.

AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE. See Section 3102.2.
AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE. See Section 3102.2.
Double skin. See Section 3102.2.
Single skin. See Section 3102.2.
AISLE. See Section 1002.1.
AISLE ACCESSWAY. See Section 1002.1.
[F] ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. See Section
902.1.
[F] ALARM SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. See Section
902.1.
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. See Section 1602.1.
ALTERATION. Any construction or renovation to an existing
structure other than repair or addition.
ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. See Section 1002.1.
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Buildings or
portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric,
nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individu-
als who are rendered incapable of self-preservation.
ANCHOR. See Section 2102.1.
ANCHOR BUILDING. See Section 402.2.
ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
ANNULAR SPACE. See Section 702.1.
[F] ANNUNCIATOR. See Section 902.1.
APPROVED. Acceptable to the code official or authority hav-
ing jurisdiction.
APPROVED AGENCY. See Section 1702.1.
APPROVED FABRICATOR. See Section 1702.1.
APPROVED SOURCE. An independent person, firm or cor-
poration, approved by the building official, who is competent
and experienced in the application of engineering principles to
materials, methods or systems analyses.
ARCHITECTURAL TERRA COTTA. See Section 2102.1.
AREA (for masonry). See Section 2102.1.
Bedded. See Section 2102.1.
Gross cross-sectional. See Section 2102.1.
Net cross-sectional. See Section 2102.1.
AREA, BUILDING. See Section 502.1.
AREA OF REFUGE. See Section 1002.1.
AREAWAY. A subsurface space adjacent to a building open at
the top or protected at the top by a grating or guard.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. See Section 310.2, “Res-
idential Care/Assisted living facilities.”

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:24 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

ATRIUM. See Section 404.1.1.
ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top story
and the roof rafters.
[F] AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.
See Section 902.1.
AUTOCLAVED AERATED CONCRETE (AAC). See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC. See Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.
See Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. See
Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. See Section
902.1.
[F] AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. See Section
902.1.
AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather
protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by
the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of
a lightweight frame structure over which a covering is attached.
BACKING. See Section 1402.1.
[F] BALED COTTON. See Section 307.2.
[F] BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED. See Section
307.2.
BALLAST. See Section 1502.1.
[F] BARRICADE. See Section 307.2.
Artificial barricade. See Section 307.2.
Natural barricade. See Section 307.2.
BASE FLOOD. See Section 1612.2.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. See Section 1612.2.
BASEMENT (for other than flood loads). See Section 502.1.
BASEMENT (for flood loads). See Section 1612.2.
BEARING WALL STRUCTURE. See Section 1614.2.
BED JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
BLEACHERS. See Section 1002.1.
BOARDING HOUSE. See Section 310.2.
[F] BOILING POINT. See Section 307.2.
BOND BEAM. See Section 2102.1.
BRACED WALL LINE. See Section 2302.1.
BRACED WALL PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
BRICK. See Section 2102.1.
Calcium silicate (sand lime brick). See Section 2102.1.
Clay or shale. See Section 2102.1.
Concrete. See Section 2102.1.
BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING ELEMENT. See Section 702.1.

➡

➡

BUILDING LINE. The line established by law, beyond which
a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by
law.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated
authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
this code, or a duly authorized representative.
BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. See Section 1502.1.
CABLE-RESTRAINED , AIR-SUPPORTED STRUC-
TURE. See Section 3102.2.
CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection
of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that pro-
vides weather protection, identity or decoration, and shall be
structurally independent or supported by attachment to a build-
ing on one end and by not less than one stanchion on the outer
end.
[F] CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.
See Section 902.1.
CAST STONE. See Section 2102.1.
[F] CEILING LIMIT. See Section 902.1.
CEILING RADIATION DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
CELL. See Section 408.1.1.
CELL (masonry). See Section 2102.1.
CELL TIER. See Section 408.1.1.
CEMENT PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET. See Section 721.1.1.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. See Section 1702.1.
CHILD CARE FACILITIES. See Section 308.3.1.
CHIMNEY. See Section 2102.1.
CHIMNEY TYPES. See Section 2102.1.
High-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
Low-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
Masonry type. See Section 2102.1.
Medium-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
CIRCULATION PATH. See Section 1102.1.
[F] CLEAN AGENT. See Section 902.1.
CLEANOUT. See Section 2102.1.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. See Section 304.1.1.
[F] CLOSED SYSTEM. See Section 307.2.
COLLAR JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
COLLECTOR. See Section 2302.1.
COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER. See Section
702.1.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE DUST. See Section 307.2.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS. See Section 307.2.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID. See Section 307.2.
Class II. See Section 307.2.

➡

➡

12

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:24 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

Class IIIA. See Section 307.2.
Class IIIB. See Section 307.2.
COMMON USE. See Section 1102.1.
COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. See Section
1002.1.
[F] COMPRESSED GAS. See Section 307.2.
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
CONCRETE, CARBONATE AGGREGATE. See Section
721.1.1.
CONCRETE, CELLULAR. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, LIGHTWEIGHT AGGREGATE. See Sec-
tion 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, PERLITE. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, SILICEOUS AGGREGATE. See Section
721.1.1.
CONCRETE, VERMICULITE. See Section 721.1.1.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. See Section 310.2.
CONNECTOR. See Section 2102.1.
[F] CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. See Section
902.1.
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. Written, graphic and
pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the
design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of
a project necessary for obtaining a building permit.
CONSTRUCTION TYPES. See Section 602.
Type I. See Section 602.2.
Type II. See Section 602.2.
Type III. See Section 602.3.
Type IV. See Section 602.4.
Type V. See Section 602.5.
[F] CONTINUOUS GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. See
Section 415.2.
[F] CONTROL AREA. See Section 307.2.
CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH MATER IAL . A
self-compacted,  cementitious  material  used  primarily  as  a
backfill in place of compacted fill.
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION.
See Section 2302.1.
CORRIDOR. See Section 1002.1.
CORROSION RESISTANCE. The ability of a material to
withstand deterioration of its surface or its properties when
exposed to its environment.
[F] CORROSIVE. See Section 307.2.

DEFINITIONS

➡

COURT. An open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky,
bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls or
other enclosing devices.
COVER. See Section 2102.1.
COVERED MALL BUILDING. See Section 402.2.
Mall. See Section 402.2.
Open mall. See Section 402.2.
Open mall building. See Section 402.2.
CRIPPLE WALL. See Section 2302.1.
[F] CRYOGENIC FLUID. See Section 307.2.
DALLE GLASS. See Section 2402.1.
DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
DANGEROUS. See Section 3402.1.
[F] DAY BOX. See Section 307.2.
DEAD LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
DECORATIVE GLASS. See Section 2402.1.
[F] DECORATIVE MATERIALS. All materials applied
over the building interior finish for decorative, acoustical or
other effect (such as curtains, draperies, fabrics, streamers and
surface coverings), and all other materials utilized for decora-
tive effect (such as batting, cloth, cotton, hay, stalks, straw,
vines, leaves, trees, moss and similar items), including foam
plastics and materials containing foam plastics. Decorative
materials do not include floor coverings, ordinary window
shades, interior finish and materials 0.025 inch (0.64 mm) or
less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a
substrate.
DEEP FOUNDATION. See Section 1802.1.
[F] DEFLAGRATION. See Section 307.2.
[F] DELUGE SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
DESIGN DISPLACEMENT. See Section 1908.1.1.
DESIGN EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION. See Sec-
tion 1613.2.
DESIGN FLOOD. See Section 1612.2.
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. See Section 1612.2.
DESIGN STRENGTH. See Section 1602.1.
DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM. See Section 1702.1.
[F] DETACHED BUILDING. See Section 415.2.
DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL.
See Section 1908.1.1.
DETECTABLE WARNING. See Section 1102.1.
[F] DETECTOR, HEAT. See Section 902.1.
[F] DETONATION. See Section 307.2.
DETOXIFICATION FACILITY. See Section 308.3.1.
DIAPHRAGM. See Sections 1602.1 and 2302.1.
Diaphragm, blocked. See Section 1602.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

13

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:25 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

Diaphragm, boundary. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, chord. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, flexible. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, rigid. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, unblocked. See Section 2302.1.
DIMENSIONS. See Section 2102.1.
Actual. See Section 2102.1.
Nominal. See Section 2102.1.
Specified. See Section 2102.1.
[F] DISPENSING. See Section 307.2.
DOOR, BALANCED. See Section 1002.1.
DORMITORY. See Section 310.2.
DRAFTSTOP. See Section 702.1.
DRAG STRUT. See Section 2302.1.
DRILLED SHAFT. See Section 1802.1.
Socketed drilled shaft. See Section 1802.1.
[F] DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. See
Section 902.1.
DRY FLOODPROOFING. See Section 1612.2.
DURATION OF LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling
units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let
or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, inde-
pendent living facilities for one or more persons, including per-
manent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, MULTI-
STORY. See Section 1102.1.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE A. See
Section 1102.1.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE B. See
Section 1102.1.
EGRESS COURT. See Section 1002.1.
ELEVATOR GROUP. See Section 902.1.
[F] EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
[F] EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION. See Section
415.2.
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. See
Section 1002.1.
[F] EMERGENCY VOICE /ALARM COMMUNICA-
TIONS. See Section 902.1.
EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. See Section 1102.1.
EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. See Section 502.1.
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. See Section 1602.1.
[F] EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE. See Section 415.2.

14

➡

EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. See Section 1612.2.
EXISTING STRUCTURE. See Sections 1612.2 and 3402.1.
EXIT. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ACCESS. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT DISCHARGE. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ENCLOSURE. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT, HORIZONTAL. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT PASSAGEWAY. See Section 1002.1.
EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING. See Section
802.1.
[F] EXPLOSION. See Section 307.2.
[F] EXPLOSIVE. See Section 307.2.
High explosive. See Section 307.2.
Low explosive. See Section 307.2.
Mass detonating explosives. See Section 307.2.
UN/DOTn Class 1 Explosives. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.1. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.2. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.3. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.4. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.5. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.6. See Section 307.2.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEM (EIFS).
See Section 1402.1.
EXTER IOR INSULATION AND F IN ISH SYSTEM
(EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
EXTERIOR WALL. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR WALL COVERING. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE. See Section 1402.1.
F RATING. See Section 702.1.
FABRIC PARTITION. See Section 1602.1.
FABRICATED ITEM. See Section 1702.1.
[F] FABRICATION AREA. See Section 415.2.
FACILITY. See Section 1102.1.
FACTORED LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
FIBER CEMENT SIDING. See Section 1402.1.
FIBER REINFORCED POLYMER. See Section 2602.1.
Fiberglass Reinforced Polymer. See Section 2602.1.
FIBERBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. See Section 902.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:25 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
FIRE AREA. See Section 902.1.
FIRE BARRIER. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE COMMAND CENTER. See Section 902.1.
FIRE DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. See Section 902.1.
FIRE DOOR. See Section 702.1.
FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FIRE EXIT HARDWARE. See Section 1002.1.
[F] FIRE LANE. A road or other passageway developed to
allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessar-
ily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.
FIRE PARTITION. See Section 702.1.
FIRE PROTECTION RATING. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
FIRE RESISTANCE. See Section 702.1.
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. See Section 702.1.
FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. See Section 902.1.
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. See Section 702.1.
FIRE WALL. See Section 702.1.
FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FIREBLOCKING. See Section 702.1.
FIREPLACE. See Section 2102.1.
FIREPLACE THROAT. See Section 2102.1.
[F] FIREWORKS. See Section 307.2.
Fireworks, 1.3G. See Section 307.2.
Fireworks, 1.4G. See Section 307.2.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). See Section 412.2.
FLAME SPREAD. See Section 802.1.
FLAME SPREAD INDEX. See Section 802.1.
[F] FLAMMABLE GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUID. See Section 307.2.
Class IA. See Section 307.2.
Class IB. See Section 307.2.
Class IC. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE MATERIAL. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE SOLID. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES. See Section 415.2.
[F] FLASH POINT. See Section 307.2.
FLIGHT. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOD OR FLOODING. See Section 1612.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

➡

DEFINITIONS

FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. See Sec-
tion 1612.2.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA SUBJECT TO HIGH-VELOC-
ITY WAVE ACTION. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). See Section
1612.2.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. See Section 1612.2.
FLOODWAY. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOR AREA, NET. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FLY GALLERY. See Section 410.2.
[F] FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS. See Section
902.1.
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. See Section 2602.1.
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING. See Section
1002.1.
FOOD COURT. See Section 402.2.
FOUNDATION PIER. See Section 2102.1.
FRAME STRUCTURE. See Section 1614.2.
[F] GAS CABINET. See Section 415.2.
[F] GAS ROOM. See Section 415.2.
[F] GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM. See Section 421.2.
GLASS FIBERBOARD. See Section 721.1.1.
GLUED BUILT-UP MEMBER. See Section 2302.1.
GRADE FLOOR OPENING. A window or other opening
located such that the sill height of the opening is not more than
44 inches (1118 mm) above or below the finished ground level
adjacent to the opening.
GRADE (LUMBER). See Section 2302.1.
GRADE PLANE. See Section 502.1.
GRANDSTAND. See Section 1002.1.
GRIDIRON. See Section 410.2.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA. See Section 402.2.
GROUTED MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Grouted hollow-unit masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Grouted multiwythe masonry. See Section 2102.1.
GUARD. See Section 1002.1.
GYPSUM BOARD. See Section 2502.1.
GYPSUM PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleep-
ing, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls,
storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered
habitable spaces.

15

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

➡

➡

[F] HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS. See
Section 902.1.
[F] HANDLING. See Section 307.2.
HANDRAIL. See Section 1002.1.
HARDBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
[F] HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. See Section 307.2.
[F] HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION MATERIAL (HPM).
See Section 415.2.
HEAD JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
[F] HEALTH HAZARD. See Section 307.2.
HEIGHT, BUILDING. See Section 502.1.
HEIGHT, WALLS. See Section 2102.1.
HELICAL PILE. See Section 1802.1.
HELIPORT. See Section 412.2.
HELISTOP. See Section 412.2.
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor
located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access.
[F] HIGHLY TOXIC. See Section 307.2.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS. Buildings that are listed in or eligi-
ble for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or
designated as historic under an appropriate state or local law
(see Sections 3409 and 3411.9).
HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
HOSPITALS AND MENTAL HOSPITALS. See Section
308.3.1.
HOUSING UNIT. See Section 408.1.1.
[F] HPM FLAMMABLE LIQUID. See Section 415.2.
[F] HPM ROOM. See Section 415.2.
HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS. See Section 1609.2.
[F] HYDROGEN CUTOFF ROOM. See Section 421.2.
[F ] IMMED IATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND
HEALTH (IDLH). See Section 415.2.
IMPACT LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
[F] INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS. See Section 307.2.
[F] INERT GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] INITIATING DEVICE. See Section 902.1.
INSPECTION CERTIFICATE. See Section 1702.1.
INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE. See
Section 1102.1.
INTERIOR FINISH. See Section 802.1.
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH. See Section 802.1.
[F] INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE. See Section 802.1.
INTERIOR SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH. See Section
802.1.

16

INTERLAYMENT. See Section 1502.1.
INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. See
Section 1702.1.
JOINT. See Section 702.1.
JURISDICTION. The governmental unit that has adopted
this code under due legislative authority.
LABEL. An identification applied on a product by the manu-
facturer that contains the name of the manufacturer, the func-
tion and performance characteristics of the product or material,
and the name and identification of an approved agency and that
indicates that the representative sample of the product or mate-
rial has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency (see
Section 1703.5 and “Inspection certificate,” “Manufacturer’s
designation” and “Mark”).
LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which has
been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a
nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that
ma in ta ins per iod ic inspec tion of the produc tion of the
above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that
the equipment, material or product meets identified standards
or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM. See Section 2602.1.
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. A type of construction
whose vertical and horizontal structural elements are primarily
formed by a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel
framing members.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS.
See Section 2602.1.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS.
See Section 2602.1.
LIMIT STATE. See Section 1602.1.
[F] LIQUID. See Section 415.2.
[F] LIQUID STORAGE ROOM. See Section 415.2.
[F] LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM.
See Section 415.2.
LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included
in a list published by an organization acceptable to the code
official and concerned with evaluation of products or services
that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed
equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and
whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product
or service meets identified standards or has been tested and
found suitable for a specified purpose.
LIVE LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
LIVE LOADS (ROOF). See Section 1602.1.
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD).
See Section 1602.1.
LOAD EFFECTS. See Section 1602.1.
LOAD FACTOR. See Section 1602.1.
LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
LOT. A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a
street or any public place.
[F] LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL). See Section
415.2.
LOWEST FLOOR. See Section 1612.2.
MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. See Section
1702.1.
[F] MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. See Section 902.1.
MANUFACTURER’S DESIGNATION. An identification
applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating that a
product or material complies with a specified standard or set of
rules (see also “Inspection certificate,” “Label” and “Mark”).
MARK. An identification applied on a product by the manu-
facturer indicating the name of the manufacturer and the func-
tion of a product or material (see also “Inspection certificate,”
“Label” and “Manufacturer’s designation”).
MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and
supported by the building and that projects into the public
right-of-way.
MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Ashlar masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Coursed ashlar. See Section 2102.1.
Glass unit masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Plain masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Random ashlar. See Section 2102.1.
Reinforced masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Solid masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Unreinforced (plain) masonry. See Section 2102.1.
MASONRY UNIT. See Section 2102.1.
Clay. See Section 2102.1.
Concrete. See Section 2102.1.
Hollow. See Section 2102.1.
Solid. See Section 2102.1.
MASTIC FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. See Section
1702.1.
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND
MOTION. See Section 1613.2.
MEANS OF EGRESS. See Section 1002.1.
MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES.
See Section 406.3.2.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN. See Section
1502.1.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS. See Section 1613.2.
MEMBRANE-COVERED CABLE STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
MEMBRANE PENETRATION. See Section 702.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

➡

DEFINITIONS

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP. See Section
702.1.
MENTAL HOSPITALS. See Section 308.3.1.
MERCHANDISE PAD. See Section 1002.1.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM). See Section
1402.1.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM) SYSTEM.
See Section 1402.1.
METAL ROOF PANEL. See Section 1502.1.
METAL ROOF SHINGLE. See Section 1502.1.
MEZZANINE. See Section 502.1.
MICROPILE. See Section 1802.1.
MINERAL BOARD. See Section 721.1.1.
MINERAL FIBER. See Section 702.1.
MINERAL WOOL. See Section 702.1.
MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. See Section
1502.1.
MORTAR. See Section 2102.1.
MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING. See Section 2102.1.
MULTILEVEL ASSEMBLY SEATING . See Sec t ion
1102.1.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. See Section
902.1.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. See Section
902.1.
MULTISTORY UNITS. See Section 1102.1.
NAILING, BOUNDARY. See Section 2302.1.
NAILING, EDGE. See Section 2302.1.
NAILING, FIELD. See Section 2302.1.
NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. See Section 2302.1.
Decay resistant. See Section 2302.1.
Termite resistant. See Section 2302.1.
NOMINAL LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER). See Section 2302.1.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
[F ] NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRE S SURE
(NTP). See Section 415.2.
NOSING. See Section 1002.1.
NOTIFICATION ZONE. See Section 902.1.
[F] NUISANCE ALARM. See Section 902.1.
NURSING HOMES. See Section 308.3.1.
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY. See Section 1602.1.
OCCUPANT LOAD. See Section 1002.1.
OCCUPIABLE SPACE. A room or enclosed space designed
for human occupancy in which individuals congregate for

17

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

amusement, educational or similar purposes or in which occu-
pants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means
of egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the
requirements of this code.
OPEN PARKING GARAGE. See Section 406.3.2.
[F] OPEN SYSTEM. See Section 307.2.
[F] OPERATING BUILDING. See Section 307.2.
ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. See Sec-
tion 1908.1.1.
ORD INARY RE INFORCED CONCRETE STRUC-
TURAL WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
ORD INARY STRUCTURAL PLA IN CONCRETE
WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
[F] ORGANIC PEROXIDE. See Section 307.2.
Class I. See Section 307.2.
Class II. See Section 307.2.
Class III. See Section 307.2.
Class IV. See Section 307.2.
Class V. See Section 307.2.
Unclassified detonable. See Section 307.2.
ORTHOGONAL. See Section 1613.2.
OTHER STRUCTURES. See Section 1602.1.
OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property.
[F] OXIDIZER. See Section 307.2.
Class 4. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
[F] OXIDIZING GAS. See Section 307.2.
PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). See Section 1602.1.
PANIC HARDWARE. See Section 1002.1.
PARTICLEBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
PENETRATION FIRESTOP. See Section 702.1.
PENTHOUSE. See Section 1502.1.
PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the
authority having jurisdiction which authorizes performance of
a specified activity.
PERSON. An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its
or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the afore-
said.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. See Section 310.2.
PHOTOLUMINESCENT. See Section 1002.1.
[F] PHYSICAL HAZARD. See Section 307.2.
[ F ] PHY S IOLOG ICAL WARN ING THRE SHOLD
LEVEL. See Section 415.2.

PINRAIL. See Section 410.2.
PLASTIC, APPROVED. See Section 2602.1.
PLASTIC GLAZING. See Section 2602.1.
PLATFORM. See Section 410.2.
POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. See Section 1502.1.
PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST. See Section 2302.1.
PRESTRESSED MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
PRIMARY FUNCTION. See Section 3402.1.
PRIMARY STRUCTURAL FRAME. The primary struc-
tural frame shall include all of the following structural mem-
bers:
1. The columns;
2. Structural members having direct connections to the col-
umns, including girders, beams, trusses and spandrels;
3. Members of the floor construction and roof construction
having direct connections to the columns; and
4. Bracing members that are essential to the vertical stabil-
ity of the primary structural frame under gravity loading
shall be considered part of the primary structural frame
whether or not the bracing member carries gravity loads.
PRISM. See Section 2102.1.
PROSCENIUM WALL. See Section 410.2.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
PUBLIC-USE AREAS. See Section 1102.1.
PUBLIC WAY. See Section 1002.1.
[F] PYROPHORIC. See Section 307.2.
[F] PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION. See Section 307.2.
RAMP. See Section 1002.1.
RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. See Sec-
tion 406.3.2.
[F] RECORD DRAWINGS. See Section 902.1.
REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE FOIL INSULATION.
An insulation material packaged in rolls, that is less than 0.5
inches thick, with at least one exterior low emittance surface
(0.1 or less) and a core material containing voids or cells.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual
who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design
profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the pro-
fessional registration laws of the state or jurisdiction in which
the project is to be constructed.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPON-

SIBLE CHARGE. A registered design professional engaged
by the owner to review and coordinate certain aspects of the
project, as determined by the building official, for compatibil-
ity with the design of the building or structure, including
submittal documents prepared by others, deferred submittal
documents and phased submittal documents.
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACE OF. A building or portion
thereof intended for the performance of religious services.

➡

➡

➡

➡

➡

18

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:27 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an exist-
ing building for the purpose of its maintenance.
REROOFING. See Section 1502.1.
RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR. See Section 412.2.
RESIDENTIAL CARE/ASSISTED LIVING FACILI-
TIES. See Section 310.2.
RESISTANCE FACTOR. See Section 1602.1.
RESTRICTED ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
RETRACTABLE AWNING. See Section 3105.2.
ROOF ASSEMBLY. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF COVERING. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF COVERING SYSTEM. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF DECK. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF RECOVER. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF REPAIR. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF REPLACEMENT. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF VENTILATION. See Section 1502.1.
ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. See Section 1502.1.
RUBBLE MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Coursed rubble. See Section 2102.1.
Random rubble. See Section 2102.1.
Rough or ordinary rubble. See Section 2102.1.
RUNNING BOND. See Section 2102.1.
SALLYPORT. See Section 408.1.1.
SCISSOR STAIR. See Section 1002.1.
SCUPPER. See Section 1502.1.
SECONDARY MEMBERS. The following structural mem-
bers shall be considered secondary members and not part of the
primary structural frame:
1. Structural members not having direct connections to the
columns;
2. Members of the floor construction not having direct con-
nections to the columns; and
3. Bracing members other than those that are part of the pri-
mary structural frame.

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY. See Section 1613.2.
SEISMIC-FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. See Section
1613.2.
SELF-CLOSING. See Section 702.1.
SELF-LUMINOUS. See Section 1002.1.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. See Sec t ion
1102.1.
[F] SERVICE CORRIDOR. See Section 415.2.
SERVICE ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
SHAFT. See Section 702.1.
SHAFT ENCLOSURE. See Section 702.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

DEFINITIONS

SHALLOW FOUNDATION. See Section 1802.1.
SHEAR WALL. See Sections 2102.1 and 2302.1.
Detailed plain masonry shear wall. See Section 2102.1.
Intermediate prestressed masonry shear wall. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
Intermediate reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Ordinary plain masonry shear wall. See Section 2102.1.
Ordinary plain prestressed masonry shear wall. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
Ordinary reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Perforated shear wall. See Section 2302.1.
Perforated shear wall segment. See Section 2302.1.
Special prestressed masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Special reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
SHELL. See Section 2102.1.
SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. See Section 1502.1.
[F] SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. See Section
902.1.
SITE. See Section 1102.1.
SITE CLASS. See Section 1613.2.
SITE COEFFICIENTS. See Section 1613.2.
SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM. See Section
802.1.
SKYLIGHT, UNIT. A factory-assembled, glazed fenestration
unit, containing one panel of glazing material that allows for
natural lighting through an opening in the roof assembly while
preserving the weather-resistant barrier of the roof.
SKYLIGHTS AND SLOPED GLAZING. Glass or other
transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a
slope of 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or more from vertical. Glazing
material in skylights, including unit skylights, solariums,
sunrooms, roofs and sloped walls, are included in this defini-
tion.
SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep,
which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating,
and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such
rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not
sleeping units.
[F] SMOKE ALARM. See Section 902.1.
SMOKE BARRIER. See Section 702.1.
SMOKE COMPARTMENT. See Section 702.1.
SMOKE DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
[F] SMOKE DETECTOR. See Section 902.1.
SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. See Section 802.1.

19

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:27 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY SEATING. See Sec-
tion 1002.1.
SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE. See Section 902.1.
[F] SOLID. See Section 415.2.
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING. See Section 411.2.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 1612.2.
SPECIAL INSPECTION. See Section 1702.1.
SPECIAL INSPECTION, CONTINUOUS. See Section
1702.1.
SPECIAL INSPECTION, PERIODIC. See Section 1702.1.
SPECIAL STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
SPECIFIED. See Section 2102.1.
S P E C I F I E D C O M P R E S S I V E S T R E N G T H O F
MASONRY (f ¢m). See Section 2102.1.
SPLICE. See Section 702.1.
SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. See Section
1702.1.
STACK BOND. See Section 2102.1.
STAGE. See Section 410.2.
STAIR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, EXTERIOR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, INTERIOR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. See Section 1002.1.
[F] STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. See Section
902.1.
Class I system. See Section 902.1.
Class II system. See Section 902.1.
Class III system. See Section 902.1.
[F] STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. See Section 902.1.
Automatic dry. See Section 902.1.
Automatic wet. See Section 902.1.
Manual dry. See Section 902.1.
Manual wet. See Section 902.1.
Semiautomatic dry. See Section 902.1.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. See Section 1612.2.
STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED. See Section
2202.1.
STEEL JOIST. See Section 2202.1.
STEEL MEMBER, STRUCTURAL. See Section 2202.1.
STEEP SLOPE. A roof slope greater than two units vertical in
12 units horizontal (17-percent slope).
STONE MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Ashlar stone masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Rubble stone masonry. See Section 2102.1.

20

[F] STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. See Section
415.2.
STORM SHELTER. See Section 423.2.
Community storm shelter. See Section 423.2.
Residential storm shelter. See Section 423.2.
STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper
surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next
above (also see “Basement,” “Mezzanine” and Section 502.1).
It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the
topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the
ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the
roof rafters.
STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its fin-
ished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the
finished surface of the floor next above is:
1. More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade plane; or
2. More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground
level at any point.
STRENGTH. See Section 2102.1.
Design strength. See Section 2102.1.
Nominal strength. See Sections 1602.1 and 2102.1.
Required strength. See Sections 1602.1 and 2102.1.
STRENGTH DESIGN. See Section 1602.1.
STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER. See Section
2302.1.
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL). See Section 2302.1.
Parallel strand lumber (PSL). See Section 2302.1.
STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED TIMBER. See
Section 2302.1.
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. See Section 1702.1.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.
SUBDIAPHRAGM. See Section 2302.1.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. See Section 1612.2.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. See Section 1612.2.
SUBSTANTIAL STRUCTURAL DAMAGE. See Section
3402.1.
SUITE. See Section 1002.1.
SUNROOM. See Section 1202.1.
[F] SUPERVISING STATION. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SERVICE. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE. See
Section 902.1.
SWIMMING POOLS. See Section 3109.2.
T RATING. See Section 702.1.
TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE. See Section 3402.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TENT. A structure, enclosure or shelter, with or without side-
walls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material sup-
ported in any manner except by air or the contents it protects.
THERMAL ISOLATION. See Section 1202.1.
THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL. See Section 2602.1.
THERMOSETTING MATERIAL. See Section 2602.1.
THIN-BED MORTAR. See Section 2102.1.
THROUGH PENETRATION. See Section 702.1.
THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. See
Section 702.1.
TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN). See Section 2302.1.
TIE, LATERAL. See Section 2102.1.
TIE, WALL. See Section 2102.1.
TILE. See Section 2102.1.
TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY. See Section 2102.1.
[F] TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. See Section 902.1.
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in
a group of three or more attached units in which each unit
extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at
least two sides.
[F] TOXIC. See Section 307.2.
TRANSIENT. See Section 310.2.
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. See Section 412.2.
TREATED WOOD. See Section 2302.1.
Fire-retardant-treated wood. See Section 2302.1.
Preservative-treated wood. See Section 2302.1.
TRIM. See Section 802.1.
[F] TROUBLE SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
TYPE A UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
TYPE B UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
UNDERLAYMENT. See Section 1502.1.
[F] UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL. See Section
307.2.
Class 4. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
[F] USE (MATERIAL). See Section 415.2.
VAPOR-PERMEABLE MEMBRANE. A material or cover-
ing having a permeance rating of 5 perms (52.9 ´10-10 kg/Pa × s × m2)
or greater, when tested in accordance with the dessicant method
using Procedure A of ASTM E 96. A vapor-permeable material
permits the passage of moisture vapor.
VAPOR RETARDER CLASS. A measure of a material or
assembly’s ability to limit the amount of moisture that passes

DEFINITIONS

through that material or assembly. Vapor retarder class shall be
defined using the desiccant method of ASTM E 96 as follows:
Class I: 0.1 perm or less.
Class II: 0.1 < perm £ 1.0 perm.
Class III: 1.0 < perm £ 10 perm.
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEM. See Section 1602.1.
VEHICULAR GATE. See Section 3110.2.
VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of sup-
plying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such
air from, any space.
VINYL SIDING. See Section 1402.1.
[F] VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.
See Section 902.1.
WALKWAY, PEDESTRIAN. A walkway used exclusively as
a pedestrian trafficway.
WALL. See Section 2102.1.
Cavity wall. See Section 2102.1.
Composite wall. See Section 2102.1.
Dry-stacked, surface-bonded wall. See Section 2102.1.
Masonry-bonded hollow wall. See Section 2102.1.
Parapet wall. See Section 2102.1.
WALL, LOAD-BEARING. Any wall meeting either of the
following classifications:
1. Any metal or wood stud wall that supports more than 100
pounds per linear foot (1459 N/m) of vertical load in
addition to its own weight.
2. Any masonry or concrete wall that supports more than
200 pounds per linear foot (2919 N/m) of vertical load in
addition to its own weight.
WALL, NONLOAD-BEARING. Any wall that is not a load-
bearing wall.
WALL PIER. See Section 1908.1.1.
[F] WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. See Section 1402.1.
WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
WEB. See Section 2102.1.
[F] WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. See
Section 902.1.
WHEELCHAIR SPACE. See Section 1102.1.
WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION. See Section 1609.2.
WINDER. See Section 1002.1.
WIRE BACKING. See Section 2502.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

[F] WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. See Section
902.1.
WOOD SHEAR PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
Composite panels. See Section 2302.1.
Oriented strand board (OSB). See Section 2302.1.
Plywood. See Section 2302.1.
[F] WORKSTATION. See Section 415.2.
WYTHE. See Section 2102.1.
YARD. An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from
the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by
this code, on the lot on which a building is situated.
[F] ZONE. See Section 902.1.
ZONE, NOTIFICATION. See Section 902.1.

22

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 3

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

SECTION 301
GENERAL

301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
classification of all buildings and structures as to use and occu-
pancy.

SECTION 302
CLASSIFICATION

302.1 General. Structures or portions of structures shall be
classified with respect to occupancy in one or more of the
groups listed below. A room or space that is intended to be
occupied at different times for different purposes shall comply
with all of the requirements that are applicable to each of the
purposes for which the room or space will be occupied. Struc-
tures with multiple occupancies or uses shall comply with Sec-
tion 508. Where a structure is proposed for a purpose that is not
specifically provided for in this code, such structure shall be
classified in the group that the occupancy most nearly resem-
bles, according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved.
1. Assembly (see Section 303): Groups A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4 and A-5
2. Business (see Section 304): Group B
3. Educational (see Section 305): Group E
4. Factory and Industrial (see Section 306): Groups F-1
and F-2
5. High Hazard (see Section 307): Groups H-1, H-2, H-3,
H-4 and H-5
6. Institutional (see Section 308): Groups I-1, I-2, I-3 and
I-4
7. Mercantile (see Section 309): Group M
8. Residential (see Section 310): Groups R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4
9. Storage (see Section 311): Groups S-1 and S-2
10. Utility and Miscellaneous (see Section 312): Group U

SECTION 303
ASSEMBLY GROUP A

303.1 Assembly Group A. Assembly Group A occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for the gathering of persons for purposes such
as civic, social or religious functions; recreation, food or drink
consumption or awaiting transportation.
Exceptions:
1. A building or tenant space used for assembly pur-
poses with an occupant load of less than 50 persons
shall be classified as a Group B occupancy.

2. A room or space used for assembly purposes with an
occupant load of less than 50 persons and accessory
to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B
occupancy or as part of that occupancy.
3. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is
less than 750 square feet (70 m2) in area and accessory
to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B
occupancy or as part of that occupancy.
4. Assembly areas that are accessory to Group E occu-
pancies are not considered separate occupancies
except when applying the assembly occupancy
requirements of Chapter 11.
5. Accessory religious educational rooms and religious
auditoriums with occupant loads of less than 100 are
not considered separate occupancies.

Assembly occupancies shall include the following:

A-1 Assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for
the production and viewing of the performing arts or
motion pictures including, but not limited to:
Motion picture theaters
Symphony and concert halls
Television and radio studios admitting an audience
Theaters

A-2 Assembly uses intended for food and/or drink con-
sumption including, but not limited to:
Banquet halls
Night clubs
Restaurants
Taverns and bars

A-3 Assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or
amusement and other assembly uses not classified else-
where in Group A including, but not limited to:
Amusement arcades
Art galleries
Bowling alleys
Community halls
Courtrooms
Dance halls (not including food or drink consump-
tion)
Exhibition halls
Funeral parlors
Gymnasiums (without spectator seating)
Indoor swimming pools (without spectator seating)
Indoor tennis courts (without spectator seating)
Lecture halls
Libraries
Museums
Places of religious worship
Pool and billiard parlors
Waiting areas in transportation terminals

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

A-4 Assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting
events and activities with spectator seating including,
but not limited to:
Arenas
Skating rinks
Swimming pools
Tennis courts
A-5 Assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing
outdoor activities including, but not limited to:
Amusement park structures
Bleachers
Grandstands
Stadiums

SECTION 304
BUSINESS GROUP B

304.1 Business Group B. Business Group B occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for office, professional or service-type transac-
tions, including storage of records and accounts. Business
occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Airport traffic control towers
Ambulatory health care facilities
Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds
Banks
Barber and beauty shops
Car wash
Civic administration
Clinic—outpatient
Dry cleaning and laundries: pick-up and delivery stations
and self-service
Educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade
Electronic data processing
Laboratories: testing and research
Motor vehicle showrooms
Post offices
Print shops
Professional services (architects, attorneys, dentists, physi-
cians, engineers, etc.)
Radio and television stations
Telephone exchanges
Training and skill development not within a school or aca-
demic program
304.1.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. Buildings or portions thereof
used to provide medical care on less than a 24-hour basis to
individuals who are not rendered incapable of self-preserva-
tion by the services provided.

SECTION 305
EDUCATIONAL GROUP E

305.1 Educational Group E. Educational Group E occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a

portion thereof, by six or more persons at any one time for
educational purposes through the 12th grade. Religious educa-
tional rooms and religious auditoriums, which are accessory to
places of religious worship in accordance with Section 303.1
and have occupant loads of less than 100, shall be classified as
A-3 occupancies.
305.2 Day care. The use of a building or structure, or portion
thereof, for educational, supervision or personal care services
for more than five children older than 21/2 years of age, shall be
classified as a Group E occupancy.

SECTION 306
FACTORY GROUP F
306.1 Factory Industrial Group F. Factory Industrial Group
F occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or
structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling,
fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or pro-
cessing operations that are not classified as a Group H hazard-
ous or Group S storage occupancy.
306.2 Factory Industrial F-1 Moderate-hazard Occupancy.
Factory industrial uses which are not classified as Factory
Industrial F-2 Low Hazard shall be classified as F-1 Moderate
Hazard and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Aircraft (manufacturing, not to include repair)
Appliances
Athletic equipment
Automobiles and other motor vehicles
Bakeries
Beverages: over 16-percent alcohol content
Bicycles
Boats
Brooms or brushes
Business machines
Cameras and photo equipment
Canvas or similar fabric
Carpets and rugs (includes cleaning)
Clothing
Construction and agricultural machinery
Disinfectants
Dry cleaning and dyeing
Electric generation plants
Electronics
Engines (including rebuilding)
Food processing
Furniture
Hemp products
Jute products
Laundries
Leather products
Machinery
Metals
Millwork (sash and door)
Motion pictures and television filming (without spectators)
Musical instruments
Optical goods
Paper mills or products
Photographic film

24

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Plastic products
Printing or publishing
Recreational vehicles
Refuse incineration
Shoes
Soaps and detergents
Textiles
Tobacco
Trailers
Upholstering
Wood; distillation
Woodworking (cabinet)
306.3 Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard Occupancy. Fac-
tory industrial uses that involve the fabrication or manufactur-
ing of noncombustible materials which during finishing,
packing or processing do not involve a significant fire hazard
shall be classified as F-2 occupancies and shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
Beverages: up to and including 16-percent alcohol content
Brick and masonry
Ceramic products
Foundries
Glass products
Gypsum
Ice
Metal products (fabrication and assembly)

SECTION 307
HIGH-HAZARD GROUP H
[F] 307.1 High-hazard Group H. High-hazard Group H occu-
pancy includes, among others, the use of a building or struc-
ture, or a portion thereof, that involves the manufacturing,
processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a
physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those
allowed in control areas complying with Section 414, based on
the maximum allowable quantity limits for control areas set
forth in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Hazardous occupancies
are classified in Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 and shall
be in accordance with this section, the requirements of Section
415 and the International Fire Code. Hazardous materials
stored, or used on top of roofs or canopies shall be classified as
outdoor storage or use and shall comply with the International
Fire Code.
Exceptions: The following shall not be classified as Group
H, but shall be classified as the occupancy that they most
nearly resemble.
1. Buildings and structures occupied for the applica-
tion of flammable finishes, provided that such build-

➡

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

ings or areas conform to the requirements of Section
416 and the International Fire Code.
2. Wholesale and retail sales and storage of flammable
and combustible liquids in mercantile occupancies
conforming to the International Fire Code.
3. Closed piping system containing flammable or
combustible liquids or gases utilized for the opera-
tion of machinery or equipment.
4. Cleaning establishments that utilize combustible
liquid solvents having a flash point of 140°F (60°C)
or higher in closed systems employing equipment
listed by an approved testing agency, provided that
this occupancy is separated from all other areas of
the building by 1-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
712, or both.
5. Cleaning establishments that utilize a liquid solvent
having a flash point at or above 200°F (93°C).
6. Liquor stores and distributors without bulk storage.
7. Refrigeration systems.
8. The storage or utilization of materials for agricul-
tural purposes on the premises.
9. Stationary batteries utilized for facility emergency
power, uninterrupted power supply or telecommu-
nication facilities, provided that the batteries are
provided with safety venting caps and ventilation is
provided in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code.
10. Corrosives shall not include personal or household
products in their original packaging used in retail
display or commonly used building materials.
11. Buildings and structures occupied for aerosol stor-
age shall be classified as Group S-1, provided that
such buildings conform to the requirements of the
International Fire Code.
12. Display and storage of nonflammable solid and non-
flammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous
materials in quantities not exceeding the maximum
allowable quantity per control area in Group M or S
occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5.
13. The storage of black powder, smokeless propellant
and small arms primers in Groups M and R-3 and
special industrial explosive devices in Groups B, F,
M and S, provided such storage conforms to the
quantity limits and requirements prescribed in the
International Fire Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

25

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

3

26

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

[

A
E
H
L
B
F
A
O
A
F
E
R
A

]

T

1
7
0
Z
3

.

(

1

)

M

X
A

I

M

U

M

A

L
L

O

W

B
A

E
L

N
A
U
Q

N
O
C
R
E
P
Y
T
T

I

T

O
R

L

S
U
O
D
R
A

M

A

A
R
E
T

I

P
S
L

O

A
C
S
Y
H
P
A
G
N
S

I

I

L

A
H

Z

D
R
A

a

,

,
j

m

,

n

,

p

M

A

A
R
E
T

I

L

C

L

S
S
A

N
E
S
E
U
D
L
H
Y
E
B
T
D
X
A
E
A
T
P
E
U
M
O
N
C
O
A
L
X
E
L
U
R
H
E
A
Q
G

W

T

I

M

M

W

I

I

T
S

G
A
R
O

E

b

C
E
S
U

-

L

O

E
T
S
Y
S
D
E
S

M

S

b

E
S
U

-

O

E
T
S
Y
S
N
E
P

M

S

b

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
c
a
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
c
a
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

C

o

m

u
b

s

i
t

b

l

e

i
l

u
q

i

d

c

,

i

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

A
B

H
H

-
-

o
o
2
2

r
r
/

H
H
A
N

-
-

3
3

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
2
2
3
1
3
3
1

d

,

e

d

,

e

,

e

,

f

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
2
2
3
1
3
3
1

d

d

,

f

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
3
3
8
3

d

d

,

f

C

o

m

u
b

s

i
t

b

l

e

i
f

b

e

r

L

d
o
o

e
s
e

B

a

l

o

H

-

3

(
(

0
0
0
0
0
1
1

)
)

,

A
N

/

A
N

/

(
(

0
0
0
0
0
1
1

)
)

,

A
N

/

A
N

/

(
(

0
0
0
2
2

)
)

A
N

/

C
C

n
o

s
s
s
a

u

m

e

r

r
i
f

e

w

k
n
o
o

r

s

(

l

C

,

C

o

m
m

)

4
1

.

G

H

-

3

5
2
1

d

,

e

,

l

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

l
f

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

A
N

/

H

-

2

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
1

d

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

i

n

e

t
r

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

N

L

A
N

/

A
N

/

N

L

A
N

/

A
N

/

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

x
o

i

d

i

z

i

g
n

A
N

/

H

-

3

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
1

d

E

p
x

l

o

s

i

v

s
e

D
D
D
D
D
D
D

i
i
i
i
i
i
i

v
v
v
v
v
v
v

i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i

s
s
s
s
s
s
s

1
2
3
4
5
6
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

G

H
H

r
-
-
-
-
-
-

1
1
3
3
1
1
o
1

H

-

H

-

2

H
H
H
H

0
5
1
1
5
1
5
2
1
1

e

,

g

e

,

g

e

,

g

e

,

g

d

,

e

,

l

e

,

g

d

,

e

,

g

(
(
(
(

0
1
1
5
5

e
e
e
e
)
e
/
/
)
)
)
)

,

g

,

g

,

g

,

g

A
N

(

1

,

g

A
N

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
0
2
2
1
5
0
0

.
.

g

g

g

g

A
N

/

5
2
0

.

g

A
N

/

(
(

5
5
0
2
2
1
5
0
0

.
.

g
g
)
)
g
g
)
)

(
(

A
N

/

(

5
2
0

.

g
)

A
N

/

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
2
2
1
0
0

.
.

g

g

g

A
A
N
N

/
/

5
2
0

.

g

A
N

/

(
(

5
5
2
2
1
0
0

.
.

g
g
)
)
g
)
/
/

(

A
A
N
N

(

5
2
0

.

g
)

A
N

/

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

g

s
a

G

e
e
s
a

d
u
o

s
e

L

i

u
q

i
f

H

-

2

A
N

/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
0
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
0
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

i
l

u
q

i

d

c

1
d
n
1

A

1

B

a

C

H
H

-

3
2

o

r

-

A
N

/

0
0
2
3
1

d

,

e

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
2
3
1

d

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
1
3

d

d

F

l

a

m
m
m

a
a

n
o
b

l
i
t

e

(
i
l

u
1
q

i

1
d

,
,

c

o

b

i

n

A

B

,

1

C

)

A
N

/

H
H

-

3
2

o

r

-

A
N

/

0
2
1

d

,

e

,

h

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
2
1

d

,

h

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
3

d

,

h

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

s

o

i
l

d

A
N

/

H

-

3

5
2
1

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
2
1

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
2

d

A
N

/

I

n

e

t
r

g

s
a

G

e
e
s
a

d
u
o

s
e

L

i

u
q

i
f

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

N
N

L
L

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

N
N

L
L

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

O

r

g

a

n

i

c

p

e

r

x
o

i

d

e

D
U

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

VV

A
A
H
H
H
H
N
N

-
-
-
-
/
/

1
2
3
3

5
0
1
5
2
5
1

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

d

,

e

N
N

L
L

(
(
(
(

5
0
1
5
2
5
1

d
d
)
e
d
)
)
)

,

g

,

e

,

e

,

e

N
N

L
L

A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
0
2
1
2
5
1
0

.

g

d

d

d

N
N

L
L

(

5
5
0
2
1
2
5
1
0

.

g
d
)
d
)
)
)

(
(
(

N
N

L
L

A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/

5
0
5
2
1
1
2
0

.

g

d

d

d

N
N

L
L

(

5
0
5
2
1
1
2
0

.

g
)
d
d
d
)
)
)

(
(
(

N
N

L
L

O

x

i

d

i

e
z

r

k 21
43

H

r
-
-
/

1
3
o
2

H

-

H

-

3

A
H
N

0
0
0
0
1
5
0
1
2
4

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

,

e

,

f

(
(
(
(

0
0
0
0
1
5
0
1
2
4

e
d
)
d
)
e
)
)

,

g

,

e

A MEMBER OF THE INTERNATIONAL CODE FAMILY®

IBC®

INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Receive FREE updates, excerpts of code references, technical 
articles, and more when you register your code book. Go to 

www.iccsafe.org/CodesPlus today!

8-61816-01_IBC_TitlePg_Final.indd   1

2/4/2009   12:42:56 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 International Building Code ®

First Printing: February 2009

ISBN: 978-1-58001-725-1 (soft-cover edition)
ISBN: 978-1-58001-724-4 (loose-leaf edition)

COPYRIGHT © 2009
by
INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This 2009 International Building Code® is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Coun-
cil, Inc. Without advance written permission from the copyright owner, no part of this book may be reproduced, distributed or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation, electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example, and
not limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage retrieval system). For information on permission to copy
material exceeding fair use, please contact: Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478. Phone
1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233 ).

Trademarks: “International Code Council,” the “International Code Council” logo and the “International Building Code” are trade-
marks of the International Code Council, Inc.

PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.

0a_ibc_copy_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)a_ibc_copy_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:30:22 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PREFACE

Introduction

Internationally, code officials recognize the need for a modern, up-to-date building code addressing the design and installation of
building systems through requirements emphasizing performance. The International Building Code®, in this 2009 edition, is
designed to meet these needs through model code regulations that safeguard the public health and safety in all communities, large
and small.
This comprehensive building code establishes minimum regulations for building systems using prescriptive and perfor-
mance-related provisions. It is founded on broad-based principles that make possible the use of new materials and new building
designs. This 2009 edition is fully compatible with all the International Codes® (I-Codes®) published by the International Code
Council (ICC)®, including the International Energy Conservation Code®, International Existing Building Code®, International
Fire Code®, International Fuel Gas Code®, International Mechanical Code®, ICC Performance Code®, International Plumbing
Code®, International Private Sewage Disposal Code®, International Property Maintenance Code®, International Residential
Code®, International Wildland-Urban Interface Code™ and International Zoning Code®.
The International Building Code provisions provide many benefits, among which is the model code development process that
offers an international forum for building professionals to discuss performance and prescriptive code requirements. This forum pro-
vides an excellent arena to debate proposed revisions. This model code also encourages international consistency in the application
of provisions.

Development

The first edition of the International Building Code (2000) was the culmination of an effort initiated in 1997 by the ICC. This
included five drafting subcommittees appointed by ICC and consisting of representatives of the three statutory members of the
International Code Council at that time, including: Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA), Inter-
national Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) and Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI). The intent was to
draft a comprehensive set of regulations for building systems consistent with and inclusive of the scope of the existing model codes.
Technical content of the latest model codes promulgated by BOCA, ICBO and SBCCI was utilized as the basis for the development,
followed by public hearings in 1997, 1998 and 1999 to consider proposed changes. This 2009 edition presents the code as originally
issued, with changes reflected in the 2003 and 2006 editions and further changes approved through the ICC Code Development Pro-
cess through 2008. A new edition such as this is promulgated every 3 years.
This code is founded on principles intended to establish provisions consistent with the scope of a building code that adequately
protects public health, safety and welfare; provisions that do not unnecessarily increase construction costs; provisions that do not
restrict the use of new materials, products or methods of construction; and provisions that do not give preferential treatment to par-
ticular types or classes of materials, products or methods of construction.

Adoption

The International Building Code is available for adoption and use by jurisdictions internationally. Its use within a governmental
jurisdiction is intended to be accomplished through adoption by reference in accordance with proceedings establishing the jurisdic-
tion’s laws. At the time of adoption, jurisdictions should insert the appropriate information in provisions requiring specific local
information, such as the name of the adopting jurisdiction. These locations are shown in bracketed words in small capital letters in
the code and in the sample ordinance. The sample adoption ordinance on page xv addresses several key elements of a code adoption
ordinance, including the information required for insertion into the code text.

Maintenance

The International Building Code is kept up to date through the review of proposed changes submitted by code enforcing officials,
industry representatives, design professionals and other interested parties. Proposed changes are carefully considered through an
open code development process in which all interested and affected parties may participate.
The contents of this work are subject to change both through the Code Development Cycles and the governmental body that
enacts the code into law. For more information regarding the code development process, contact the Code and Standard Develop-
ment Department of the International Code Council.
While the development procedure of the International Building Code assures the highest degree of care, ICC, its members and
those participating in the development of this code do not accept any liability resulting from compliance or noncompliance with the
provisions because ICC does not have the power or authority to police or enforce compliance with the contents of this code. Only the
governmental body that enacts the code into law has such authority.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

iii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:49 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Letter Designations in Front of Section Numbers

In each code development cycle, proposed changes to the code are considered at the Code Development Hearings by the applicable
ICC Code Development Committee, whose action constitutes a recommendation to the voting membership for final action on the
proposed change. Proposed changes to a code section that has a number beginning with a letter in brackets are considered by a dif-
ferent code development committee. For example, proposed changes to code sections that have [F] in front of them (e.g., [F]
903.1.1.1) are considered by the ICC Fire Code Development Committee at the code development hearings.
The content of sections in this code that begin with a letter designation are maintained by another code development committee in
accordance with the following:
[E] = International Energy Conservation Code Development Committee;
[EB] = International Existing Building Code Development Committee;
[F] = International Fire Code Development Committee;
[FG] = International Fuel Gas Code Development Committee;
[M] = International Mechanical Code Development Committee; and
[P] = International Plumbing Code Development Committee.

Marginal Markings

Solid vertical lines in the margins within the body of the code indicate a technical change from the requirements of the 2006 edition.
Deletion indicators in the form of an arrow ( ¬ ) are provided in the margin where an entire section, paragraph, exception or table
has been deleted or an item in a list of items or a table has been deleted.
Chapter 7 user note: Chapter 7 of the code has been reorganized from the 2006 edition as a result of an approved code change
proposal. This proposal renumbered what was Section 714 in the 2006 edition to Section 704 in this edition, which in turn resulted in
renumbering Sections 704 through 713 in the 2006 edition to Sections 705 through 714 in this edition. Marginal markings are
included at each section number but have not been included to reflect the subsection renumbering.

Coordination between the International Building and Fire Codes

Because the coordination of technical provisions is one of the benefits of adopting the ICC family of model codes, users will find the
ICC codes to be a very flexible set of model documents. To accomplish this flexibility some technical provisions are duplicated in
some of the model code documents. While the International Codes are provided as a comprehensive set of model codes for the built
environment, documents are occasionally adopted as a stand-alone regulation. When one of the model documents is adopted as the
basis of a stand-alone code, that code should provide a complete package of requirements with enforcement assigned to the entity
for which the adoption is being made.
The model codes can also be adopted as a family of complimentary codes. When adopted together there should be no conflict of
any of the technical provisions. When multiple model codes are adopted in a jurisdiction it is important for the adopting authority to
evaluate the provisions in each code document and determine how and by which agency(ies) they will be enforced. It is important,
therefore, to understand that where technical provisions are duplicated in multiple model documents that enforcement duties must
be clearly assigned by the local adopting jurisdiction. ICC remains committed to providing state-of-the-art model code documents
that, when adopted locally, will reduce the cost to government of code adoption and enforcement and protect the public health,
safety and welfare.

Italicized Terms

Selected terms set forth in Chapter 2, Definitions, are italicized where they appear in code text (except those in Sections 1903
through 1908 where italics indicate provisions that differ from ACI 318). Such terms are not italicized where the definition set forth
in Chapter 2 does not impart the intended meaning in the use of the term. The terms selected have definitions which the user should
read carefully to facilitate better understanding of the code.

iv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:49 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Effective Use of the International Building Code

The International Building Code® (IBC®) is a model code that provides minimum requirements to safeguard the public health,
safety and general welfare of the occupants of new and existing buildings and structures. The IBC is fully compatible with the ICC
family of codes, including: International Energy Conservation Code® (IECC®), International Existing Building Code® (IEBC®),
International Fire Code® (IFC®), International Fuel Gas Code® (IFGC®), International Mechanical Code® (IMC®), ICC Perfor-
mance Code® (ICCPC®), International Plumbing Code® (IPC®), International Private Sewage Disposal Code® (IPSDC®), Interna-
tional Property Maintenance Code® (IPMC®), International Residential Code® (IRC®), International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code™ (IWUIC®) and International Zoning Code® (IZC®).
The IBC addresses structural strength, means of egress, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation, accessibility, energy con-
servation and life safety in regards to new and existing buildings, facilities and systems. The codes are promulgated on a 3-year cycle
to allow for new construction methods and technologies to be incorporated into the codes. Alternative materials, designs and meth-
ods not specifically addressed in the code can be approved by the code official where the proposed materials, designs or methods
comply with the intent of the provisions of the code (see Section 104.11).
The IBC applies to all occupancies, including one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses that are not within the scope of the
IRC. The IRC is referenced for coverage of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses as defined in the Exception to
Section 101.2 and the definition for “townhouse” in Chapter 2. The IBC applies to all types of buildings and structures unless
exempted. Work exempted from permits is listed in Section 105.2.

Arrangement and Format of the 2009 IBC

Before applying the requirements of the IBC, it is beneficial to understand its arrangement and format. The IBC, like other codes
published by ICC, is arranged and organized to follow sequential steps that generally occur during a plan review or inspection.

Chapters

1–2

3

4, 31

5–6

7–9

10

11

12–13, 27–30

14–26

32

33

34

35

Subjects

Administration and definitions

Use and occupancy classifications

Special requirements for specific occupancies or elements

Height and area limitations based on type of construction

Fire resistance and protection requirements

Requirements for evacuation

Specific requirements to allow use and access to a building for persons with disabilities

Building systems, such as lighting, HVAC, plumbing fixtures, elevators

Structural components—performance and stability

Encroachment outside of property lines

Safeguards during construction

Existing building allowances

Referenced standards

Appendices A–K

Appendices

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

v

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:50 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

The IBC requirements for high hazard, fire-resistance-rated construction, interior finish, fire protection systems, means of
egress, emergency and standby power, and temporary structures are directly correlated with the requirements of the IFC. The fol-
lowing chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated to the IFC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

IFC
Chapter/Section

Subject

Sections 307, 414, 415

Chapters 27–44

High-hazard requirements

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 27

Section 3103

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Section 604

Chapter 24

Fire-resistance-rated construction

Interior finish, decorative materials and furnishings

Fire protection systems

Means of egress

Standby and emergency power

Temporary structures

The IBC requirements for smoke control systems, and smoke and fire dampers are directly correlated to the requirements of the
IMC. IBC Chapter 28 is a reference to the IMC and the IFGC for chimney, fireplaces and barbeques, and all aspects of mechanical
systems. The following chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated with the IMC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

Section 716

Section 909

IMC
Chapter/Section

Section 607

Section 513

Subject

Smoke and fire dampers

Smoke control

The IBC requirements for plumbing fixtures and toilet rooms are directly correlated to the requirements of the IPC. The following
chapters/sections of the IBC are correlated with the IPC:

IBC
Chapter/Section

Chapter 29

IPC
Chapter/Section

Chapters 3 & 4

Subject

Plumbing fixtures and facilities

The following is a chapter-by-chapter synopsis of the scope and intent of the provisions of the International Building Code.
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration. Chapter 1 establishes the limits of applicability of the code and describes how the code is to
be applied and enforced. Chapter 1 is in two parts, Part 1—Scope and Application (Sections 101–102) and Part 2—Administration
and Enforcement (Sections 103–116). Section 101 identifies which buildings and structures come under its purview and references
other ICC codes as applicable. Standards and codes are scoped to the extent referenced (see Section 102.4).
The building code is intended to be adopted as a legally enforceable document and it cannot be effective without adequate provi-
sions for its administration and enforcement. The provisions of Chapter 1 establish the authority and duties of the code official
appointed by the jurisdiction having authority and also establish the rights and privileges of the design professional, contractor and
property owner.
Chapter 2 Definitions. All terms that are defined in the code are listed alphabetically in Chapter 2. Terms are defined in Chapter 2
or there is a reference to the section where the definition is located. While a defined term may be listed in one chapter or another, the
meaning is applicable throughout the code.
Codes are technical documents and every word, term and punctuation mark can impact the meaning of the code text and the
intended results. The code often uses terms that have a unique meaning in the code and the code meaning can differ substantially
from the ordinarily understood meaning of the term as used outside of the code. Where understanding of a term’s definition is espe-
cially key to or necessary for understanding a particular code provision, the term is shown in italics wherever it appears in the code.

vi

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:55 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

This is true only for those terms that have a meaning that is unique to the code. In other words, the generally understood meaning
of a term or phrase might not be sufficient or consistent with the meaning prescribed by the code; therefore, it is essential that the
code-defined meaning be known.
Definitions are deemed to be of prime importance in establishing the meaning and intent of the code text that uses the terms. The
user of the code should be familiar with and consult this chapter because the definitions are essential to the correct interpretation of
the code and because the user may not be aware that a term is defined.
Chapter 3 Use and Occupancy Classification. Chapter 3 provides for the classification of buildings, structures and parts thereof
based on the purpose or purposes for which they are used. Section 302 identifies the groups into which all buildings, structures and
parts thereof must be classified. Sections 303 through 312 identify the occupancy characteristics of each group classification. In
some sections, specific group classifications having requirements in common are collectively organized such that one term applies
to all. For example, Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4 and A-5 are individual groups for assembly-type buildings. The general term
“Group A,” however, includes each of these individual groups. Other groups include Business (B), Educational (E), Factory (F-1,
F-2), High Hazard (H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, H-5), Institutional (I-1, I-2, I-3, I-4), Mercantile (M), Residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4), Stor-
age (S-1, S-2) and Utility (U). In some occupancies, the smaller number means a higher hazard, b ut that is not always the case.
Defining the use of the buildings is very important as it sets the tone for the remaining chapters of the code. Occupancy works
with the height, area and construction type requirements in Chapters 5 and 6, as well as the special provisions in Chapter 4, to deter-
mine “equivalent risk,” or providing a reasonable level of protection or life safety for building occupants. The determination of
equivalent risk involves three interdependent considerations: (1) the level of fire hazard associated with the specific occupancy of
the facility; (2) the reduction of fire hazard by limiting the floor area(s) and the height of the building based on the fuel load (combus-
tible contents and burnable building components) and (3) the level of overall fire resistance provided by the type of construction
used for the building. The greater the potential fire hazards indicated as a function of the group, the lesser the height and area allow-
ances for a particular construction type.
Occupancy classification also plays a key part in organizing and prescribing the appropriate protection measures. As such,
threshold requirements for fire protection and means of egress systems are based on occupancy classification (see Chapters 9 and
10). Other sections of the code also contain requirements respective to the classification of building groups. For example, Section
706 deals with requirements for fire wall fire-resistance ratings that are tied to the occupancy classification of a building and Section
803.9 contains interior finish requirements that are dependent upon the occupancy classification. The use of the space, rather than
the occupancy of the building is utilized for determining occupant loading (Section 1004) and live loading (Section 1607).
Chapter 4 Special Detailed Requirements Based On Use and Occupancy. Chapter 4 contains the requirements for protecting
special uses and occupancies, which are supplemental to the remainder of the code. Chapter 4 contains provisions that may alter
requirements found elsewhere in the code; however, the general requirements of the code still apply unless modified within the
chapter. For example, the height and area limitations established in Chapter 5 apply to all special occupancies unless Chapter 4 con-
tains height and area limitations. In this case, the limitations in Chapter 4 supersede those in other sections. An example of this is the
height and area limitations for open parking garages given in Section 406.3.5, which supersede the limitations given in Section 503.
In some instances, it may not be necessary to apply the provisions of Chapter 4. For example, if a covered mall building complies
with the provisions of the code for Group M, Section 402 does not apply; however, other sections that deal with a use, process or
operation must be applied to that specific occupancy, such as stages and platforms, special amusement buildings and hazardous
materials (Sections 410, 411 and 414).
The chapter includes requirements for buildings and conditions that apply to one or more groups, such as high-rise buildings,
underground buildings or atriums. Special uses may also imply specific occupancies and operations, such as for Group H, hazard-
ous materials, application of flammable finishes, drying rooms, organic coatings and combustible storage or hydrogen cutoff
rooms, all of which are coordinated with the IFC. Unique consideration is taken for special use areas, such as covered mall build-
ings, motor-vehicle-related occupancies, special amusement buildings and aircraft-related occupancies. Special facilities within
other occupancies are considered, such as stages and platforms, motion picture projection rooms and storm shelters. Finally, in
order that the overall package of protection features can be easily understood, unique considerations for specific occupancies are
addressed: Groups I-1, I-2, I-3, R-1, R-2, R-3 (by def inition R-4), ambulatory care facilities and live/work units.
Chapter 5 General Building Heights and Areas. Chapter 5 contains the provisions that regulate the minimum type of construc-
tion for area limits and height limits based on the occupancy of the building. Height and area increases (including allowances for
basements, mezzanines and equipment platforms) are permitted based on open frontage for fire department access, and the type of
sprinkler protection provided and separation (Sections 503–506, 509). These thresholds are reduced for buildings over three stories
in height in accordance with Section 506.4.1. Provisions include the protection and/or separation of incidental accessory occupan-
cies (Table 508.2.5), accessory occupancies (Sections 508.2) and mixed uses in the same building (Sections 506.5, 508.3, 508.4 and
509). Unlimited area buildings are permitted in certain occupancies when they meet special provisions (Section 507).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

vii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009pgvii.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Monday, March 09, 2009 9:04:29 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Table 503 is the keystone in setting thresholds for building size based on the building’s use and the materials with which it is con-
structed. If one then looks at Table 503, the relationship among group classification, allowable heights and areas and types of con-
struction becomes apparent. Respective to each group classification, the greater the fire-resistance rating of structural elements, as
represented by the type of construction, the greater the floor area and height allowances. The greater the potential fire hazards indi-
cated as a function of the group, the lesser the height and area allowances for a particular construction type.
Chapter 6 Types of Construction. The interdependence of these fire safety considerations can be seen by first looking at Tables
601 and 602, which show the fire-resistance ratings of the principal structural elements comprising a building in relation to the five
classifications for types of construction. Type I construction is the classification that generally requires the highest fire-resistance
ratings for structural elements, whereas Type V construction, which is designated as a combustible type of construction, generally
requires the least amount of fire-resistance-rated structural elements. The greater the potential fire hazards indicated as a function of
the group, the lesser the height and area allowances for a particular construction type. Section 603 includes a list of combustible ele-
ments that can be part of a noncombustible building (Types I and II construction).
Chapter 7 Fire and Smoke Protection Features. The provisions of Chapter 7 present the fundamental concepts of fire perfor-
mance that all buildings are expected to achieve in some form. This chapter identifies the acceptable materials, techniques and meth-
ods which proposed construction can be designed and evaluated against to determine a building’s ability to limit the impact of fire.
The fire-resistance-rated construction requirements within Chapter 7 provide passive resistance to the spread and effects of fire.
Types of separations addressed include fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, horizontal assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke par-
titions. A fire produces heat that can weaken structural components and smoke products that cause property damage and place occu-
pants at risk. The requirements of Chapter 7 work in unison with height and area requirements (Chapter 5), active fire detection and
suppression systems (Chapter 9) and occupant egress requirements (Chapter 10) to contain a fire should it occur while helping
ensure occupants are able to safely exit.
Chapter 8 Interior Finishes. This chapter contains the performance requirements for controlling fire growth within buildings by
restricting interior finish and decorative materials. Past fire experience has shown that interior finish and decorative materials are
key elements in the development and spread of fire. The provisions of Chapter 8 require materials used as interior finishes and deco-
rations to meet certain flame-spread index or flame-propagation criteria based on the relative fire hazard associated with the occu-
pancy. As smoke is also a hazard associated with fire, this chapter contains limits on the smoke development characteristics of
interior finishes. The performance of the material is evaluated based on test standards.
Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems. Chapter 9 prescribes the minimum requirements for active systems of fire protection equip-
ment to perform the following functions: detect a fire; alert the occupants or fire department of a fire emergency; and control smoke
and control or extinguish the fire. Generally, the requirements are based on the occupancy, the height and the area of the building,
because these are the factors that most affect fire-fighting capabilities and the relative hazard of a specific building or portion
thereof. This chapter parallels and is substantially duplicated in Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code (IFC); however, the IFC
Chapter 9 also contains periodic testing criteria that are not contained in the IBC. In addition, the special fire protection system
requirements based on use and occupancy found in IBC Chapter 4 are duplicated in IFC Chapter 9 as a user convenience.
Chapter 10 Means of Egress. The general criteria set forth in Chapter 10 regulating the design of the means of egress are estab-
lished as the primary method for protection of people in buildings by allowing timely relocation or evacuation of building occu-
pants. Both prescriptive and performance language is utilized in this chapter to provide for a basic approach in the determination of a
safe exiting system for all occupancies. It addresses all portions of the egress system (i.e., exit access, exits and exit discharge) and
includes design requirements as well as provisions regulating individual components. The requirements detail the size, arrange-
ment, number and protection of means of egress components. Functional and operational characteristics also are specified for the
components that will permit their safe use without special knowledge or effort. The means of egress protection requirements work
in coordination with other sections of the code, such as protection of vertical openings (see Chapter 7), interior finish (see Chapter
8), fire suppression and detection systems (see Chapter 9) and numerous others, all having an impact on life safety. Chapter 10 of the
IBC is duplicated in Chapter 10 of the IFC; however, the IFC contains two additional sections on the means of egress system in exist-
ing buildings.
Chapter 11 Accessibility. Chapter 11 contains provisions that set forth requirements for accessibility of buildings and their associ-
ated sites and facilities for people with physical disabilities. The fundamental philosophy of the code on the subject of accessibility
is that everything is required to be accessible. This is reflected in the basic applicability requirement (see Section 1103.1). The
code’s scoping requirements then address the conditions under which accessibility is not required in terms of exceptions to this gen-
eral mandate. While the IBC contains scoping provisions for accessibility (e.g., what, where and how many), ICC/ANSI A117.1,
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, is the referenced standard for the technical provisions (i.e., how).
There are many accessibility issues that not only benefit people with disabilities, but also provide a tangible benefit to people
without disabilities. This type of requirement can be set forth in the code as generally applicable without necessarily identifying it

viii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

specifically as an accessibility-related issue. Such a requirement would then be considered as having been “mainstreamed.” For
example, visible alarms are located in Chapter 9 and ramp requirements are addressed in Chapter 10.
Accessibility criteria for existing buildings are addressed in Section 3411. Appendix E is supplemental information included in
the code to address accessibility for items in the new Americans with Disabilities Act/Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility
Guidelines (ADA/ABA) that were not typically enforceable through the standard traditional building code enforcement approach
system (e.g., beds, room signage). The International Residential Code (IRC) references Chapter 11 for accessibility provisions;
therefore, this chapter may be applicable to housing covered under the IRC.
Chapter 12 Interior Environment. Chapter 12 provides minimum standards for the interior environment of a building. The stan-
dards address the minimum sizes of spaces, minimum temperature levels, and minimum light and ventilation levels. The collection
of requirements addresses limiting sound transmission through walls, ventilation of attic spaces and under floor spaces (crawl
spaces). Finally, the chapter provides minimum standards for walls, partitions and floors to resist water intrusion and damage in
rooms such as toilet and shower facilities, where water is frequently in use.
Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency. The purpose of Chapter 13 is to provide minimum design requirements that will promote efficient
utilization of energy in buildings. The requirements are directed toward the design of building envelopes with adequate thermal
resistance and low air leakage, and toward the design and selection of mechanical, water heating, electrical and illumination systems
that promote effective use of depletable energy resources. For the specifics of these criteria, Chapter 13 requires design and con-
struction in compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC).
Chapter 14 Exterior Walls. This chapter addresses requirements for exterior walls of buildings. Minimum standards for wall cov-
ering materials, installation of wall coverings and the ability of the wall to provide weather protection are provided. This chapter
also requires exterior walls that are close to lot lines, or that are bearing walls for certain types of construction, to comply with the
minimum fire-resistance ratings specified in Chapters 6 and 7. The installation of each type of wall covering, be it wood, masonry,
vinyl, metal composite material or an exterior insulation and finish system, is critical to its long-term performance in protecting the
interior of the building from the elements and the spread of fire. Special attention to the use of combustible materials on the exterior
of the building such as balconies, eaves, decks and architectural trim is the focus of Section 1406.
Chapter 15 Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures. Chapter 15 provides standards for both roof assemblies as well as struc-
tures which sit on top of the roof of buildings. The criteria address roof construction and covering which includes the weather-pro-
tective barrier at the roof and, in most circumstances, a fire-resistant barrier. The chapter is prescriptive in nature and is based on
decades of experience with various traditional materials. These prescriptive rules are very important for satisfying performance of
one type of roof covering or another. Section 1509 addresses rooftop structures including penthouses, tanks, towers and spires.
Rooftop penthouses larger than prescribed in this chapter must be treated as a story under Chapter 5.
Chapter 16 Structural Design. Chapter 16 prescribes minimum structural loading requirements for use in the design and construc-
tion of buildings and structural components. It includes minimum design loads, as well as permitted design methodologies. Stan-
dards are provided for minimum design loads (live, dead, snow, wind, rain, flood and earthquake as well as load combinations). The
application of these loads and adherence to the serviceability criteria will enhance the protection of life and property. The chapter
references and relies on many nationally recognized design standards. A key standard is the American Society of Civil Engineer’s
Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures (ASCE 7). Structural design needs to address the conditions of the site
and location. Therefore maps of rainfall, seismic, snow and wind criteria in different regions are provided.
Chapter 17 Structural Tests and Special Inspections. Chapter 17 provides a variety of procedures and criteria for testing materi-
als and assemblies, for labeling materials and assemblies, and for special inspection of structural assemblies. This chapter expands
on the requirements of Chapter 1 regarding the roles and responsibilities of the building official regarding approval of building com-
ponents. It also provides additional duties and responsibilities for the owner, contractor, design professionals and special inspectors.
Proper assembly of structural components, proper quality of materials used, and proper application of materials are essential to
ensuring that a building, once constructed, complies with the structural and fire-resistance minimums of the code and the approved
design. To determine this compliance often requires continuous or frequent inspection and testing. Chapter 17 establishes these spe-
cial inspection and testing standards as well as reporting of the work to the building official.
Chapter 18 Soils and Foundations. Chapter 18 contains minimum requirements for design, construction and resistance to water
intrusion of foundation systems for buildings and other structures. It provides criteria for the geotechnical and structural consider-
ations in the selection and installation of adequate support for the loads transferred from the structure above. The uncertainties of
foundation construction make it extremely difficult to address every potential failure within the text of the code. The chapter
includes requirements for soils investigation and site preparation for receiving a foundation including the allowed load-bearing val-
ues for soils and for protecting the foundation from water intrusion. Section 1808 addresses the basic requirements for all founda-
tion types. Later sections address foundation requirements that are specific to shallow foundations and deep foundations. Due care

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

ix

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

must be exercised in the planning and design of foundation systems based on obtaining sufficient soils information, the use of
accepted engineering procedures, experience and good technical judgment.
Chapter 19 Concrete. This chapter provides minimum accepted practices to the design and construction of buildings and structural
components using concrete—both plain and reinforced. Chapter 19 is formatted to parallel American Concrete Institute (ACI) 318,
Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete. The chapter also includes references to additional standards. Structural con-
crete must be designed and constructed to comply with this code and all listed standards. There are specific sections of the chapter
addressing concrete slabs, anchorage to concrete, shotcrete, reinforced gypsum concrete and concrete-filled pipe columns. Because
of the variable properties of material and numerous design and construction options available in the uses of concrete, due care and
control throughout the construction process is necessary.
Chapter 20 Aluminum. Chapter 20 contains standards for the use of aluminum in building construction. Only the structural appli-
cations of aluminum are addressed. The chapter does not address the use of aluminum in specialty products such as storefront or
window framing or architectural hardware. The use of aluminum in heating, ventilating or air-conditioning systems is addressed in
the International Mechanical Code (IMC). The chapter references national standards from the Aluminum Association for use of
aluminum in building construction, AA ASM 35, Aluminum Sheet Metal Work in Building Construction, and AA ADM 1, Alumi-
num Design Manual . By utilizing the standards set forth, a proper application of this material can be obtained.
Chapter 21 Masonry. This chapter provides comprehensive and practical requirements for masonry construction. The provisions
of Chapter 21 require minimum accepted practices and the use of standards for the design and construction of masonry structures.
The provisions address: material specifications and test methods; types of wall construction; criteria for engineered and empirical
designs; required details of construction including the execution of construction. Masonry design methodologies including allow-
able stress design, strength design and empirical design are covered by provisions of the chapter. Also addressed are masonry fire-
places and chimneys, masonry heaters and glass unit masonry. Fire-resistant construction using masonry is also required to comply
with Chapter 7.  Masonry foundations are also subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.
Chapter 22 Steel. Chapter 22 provides the requirements necessary for the design and construction of structural steel (including
composite construction), cold-formed steel, steel joists, steel cable structures and steel storage racks. The chapter specifies appro-
priate design and construction standards for these types of structures. It also provides a road map of the applicable technical require-
ments for steel structures. Steel is a noncombustible building material commonly associated with Types I and II construction;
however, it is permitted to be used in all types of construction. The code requires that materials used in the design of structural steel
members conform to designated national standards. Chapter 22 is involved with the design and use of steel materials using the speci-
fications and standards of the American Institute for Steel Construction, the American Iron and Steel Institute, the Steel Joist Insti-
tute and the American Society of Civil Engineers.
Chapter 23 Wood. This chapter provides minimum guidance for the design of buildings and structures that use wood and
wood-based products in their framing and fabrication. The chapter is organized around three design methodologies: allowable
stress design (ASD), load and resistance-factor design (LRFD) and conventional light-frame construction. Included in the chapter
are references to design and manufacturing standards for various wood and wood-based products; general construction require-
ments; design criteria for lateral-force-resisting systems and specific requirements for the application of the three design methods.
In general, only Type III, IV or V buildings may be constructed of wood. Accordingly Chapter 23 is referenced when the combina-
tion of the occupancy (determined in Chapter 3) and the height and area of the building (determined in Chapter 5) indicate that con-
struction can be Type III, IV or V.
Chapter 24 Glass and Glazing. This chapter establishes regulations for glass and glazing used in buildings and structures that,
when installed, are subjected to wind, snow and dead loads. Engineering and design requirements are included in the chapter. Addi-
tional structural requirements are found in Chapter 16. A second concern of this chapter is glass and glazing used in areas where it is
likely to have an impact on the occupants. Section 2406 identifies hazardous locations where glazing installed must either be safety
glazing or blocked to prevent human impact. Safety glazing must meet stringent standards and be appropriately marked or identi-
fied. Additional standards for glass and glazing in guards, handrails, elevator hoistways and elevator cars, and in athletic facilities
are provided.
Chapter 25 Gypsum Board and Plaster. Chapter 25 contains the provisions and referenced standards that regulate the design,
construction and quality of gypsum board and plaster. These represent the most common interior and exterior finish materials in the
building industry. This chapter primarily addresses quality-control-related issues with regard to material specifications and installa-
tion requirements. Most products are manufactured under the control of industry standards. The building official or inspector pri-
marily needs to verify that the appropriate product is used and properly installed for the intended use and location. While often
simply used as wall and ceiling coverings, proper design and application are necessary to provide weather resistance and required
fire protection for both structural and nonstructural building components.
Chapter 26 Plastic. The use of plastics in building construction and components is addressed in Chapter 26. This chapter provides
standards addressing foam plastic insulation, foam plastics used as interior finish and trim, and other plastic veneers used on the

x

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:56 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

inside or outside of a building. Plastic siding is regulated by Chapter 14. Sections 2606 through 2611 address the use of light-trans-
mitting plastics in various configurations such as walls, roof panels, skylights, signs and as glazing. Requirements for the use of
fiber reinforced polymers, fiberglass reinforced polymers and reflective plastic core insulation are also contained in this chapter.
Some plastics exhibit rapid flame spread and heavy smoke density characteristics when exposed to fire. Additionally, exposure to
the heat generated by a fire can cause some plastics to deform, which can affect their performance. The requirements and limitations
of this chapter are necessary to control the use of plastic and foam plastic products such that they do not compromise the safety of
building occupants.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Since electrical systems and components are an integral part of almost all structures, it is necessary for the
code to address the installation of such systems. For this purpose, Chapter 27 references the National Electrical Code (NEC). In
addition, Section 2702 addresses emergency and standby power requirements. Such systems must comply with the International
Fire Code (IFC) and referenced standards. This section also provides references to the various code sections requiring emergency
and standby power, such as high-rise buildings and buildings containing hazardous materials.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Nearly all buildings will include mechanical systems. This chapter provides references to the
International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) for the design and installation of mechanical
systems. In addition, the chapter references Chapter 21 of the IBC for masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Chapter 29 regulates the minimum number of plumbing fixtures that must be provided for every
type of building. This chapter also regulates the location of the required fixtures in various types of buildings and the construction of
toilet rooms. This section requires separate facilities for males and females except for certain types of small occupancies. The regu-
lations in this chapter come directly from Chapters 3 and 4 of the International Plumbing Code (IPC).
Chapter 30 Elevators and Conveying Systems. Chapter 30 provides standards for the installation of elevators into buildings. Ref-
erenced standards provide the requirements for the elevator system and mechanisms. Detailed standards are provided in the chapter
for hoistway enclosures, hoistway venting and machine rooms. New provisions are added in the 2009 IBC for Fire Service Access
Elevators required in high-rise buildings and for the optional choice of Occupant Evacuation Elevators (see Section 403).
Chapter 31 Special Construction. Chapter 31 contains a collection of regulations for a variety of unique structures and architec-
tural features. Pedestrian walkways and tunnels connecting two buildings are addressed in Section 3104. Membrane and air-sup-
ported structures are addressed by Section 3102. Safeguards for swimming pool safety are found in Section 3109. Standards for
temporary structures, including permit requirements are provided in Section 3103. Structures as varied as awnings, marquees,
signs, telecommunication and broadcast towers and automatic vehicular gates are also addressed (see Sections 3105 through 3108
and 3110).
Chapter 32 Encroachments into the Public Right-of-way. Buildings and structures from time to time are designed to extend over
a property line and into the public right-of-way. Local regulations outside of the building code usually set limits to such encroach-
ments, and such regulations take precedence over the provisions of this chapter. Standards are provided for encroachments below
grade for structural support, vaults and areaways. Encroachments above grade are divided into below 8 feet, 8 feet to 15 feet, and
above 15 feet, because of headroom and vehicular height issues. This includes steps, columns, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs,
windows, balconies. Similar architectural features above grade are also addressed. Pedestrian walkways must also comply with
Chapter 31.
Chapter 33 Safeguards During Construction. Chapter 33 provides safety requirements during construction and demolition of
buildings and structures. These requirements are intended to protect the public from injury and adjoining property from damage. In
addition the chapter provides for the progressive installation and operation of exit stairways and standpipe systems during construc-
tion.
Chapter 34 Existing Structures. The provisions in Chapter 34 deal with alternative methods or reduced compliance requirements
when dealing with existing building constraints. This chapter allows for a controlled departure from full compliance with the techni-
cal codes, without compromising the minimum standards for fire prevention and life safety features of the rehabilitated building.
Provisions are divided by addition, alterations, repairs, change of occupancy and moved structures. There are further allowances for
registered historic buildings. There are also special allowances for replacement of existing stairways, replacement of glass and
accessibility requirements. The fire escape requirements in Section 3406 are consistent with the fire escape requirements in Section
1030 of the International Fire Code (IFC).
Section 3412, Compliance Alternatives, allows for existing buildings to be evaluated so as to show that alterations, while not
meeting new construction requirements, will improve the current existing situation. Provisions are based on a numerical scoring
system involving 18 various safety parameters and the degree of code compliance for each issue.
Chapter 34 is repeated in the International Existing Building Code (IEBC). Sections 3402 through 3409 are repeated as IEBC
Chapter 3 and Section 3410 as Chapter 13.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xi

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Chapter 35 Referenced Standards. The code contains numerous references to standards that are used to regulate materials and
methods of construction. Chapter 35 contains a comprehensive list of all standards that are referenced in the code, including the
appendices. The standards are part of the code to the extent of the reference to the standard (see Section 102.4). Compliance with the
referenced standard is necessary for compliance with this code. By providing specifically adopted standards, the construction and
installation requirements necessary for compliance with the code can be readily determined. The basis for code compliance is,
therefore, established and available on an equal basis to the building code official, contractor, designer and owner.
Chapter 35 is organized in a manner that makes it easy to locate specific standards. It lists all of the referenced standards, alpha-
betically, by acronym of the promulgating agency of the standard. Each agency’s standards are then listed in either alphabetical or
numeric order based upon the standard identification. The list also contains the title of the standard; the edition (date) of the standard
referenced; any addenda included as part of the ICC adoption; and the section or sections of this code that reference the standard.
Appendices. Appendices are provided in the IBC to offer optional or supplemental criteria to the provisions in the main chapters of
the code. Appendices provide additional information for administration of the Department of Building Safety as well as standards
not typically administered by all building departments. Appendices have the same force and effect as the first 35 chapters of the IBC
only when explicitly adopted by the jurisdiction.
Appendix A Employee Qualifications. Effective administration and enforcement of the family of International Codes depends on
the training and expertise of the personnel employed by the jurisdiction and his or her knowledge of the codes. Section 103 of the
code establishes the Department of Building Safety and calls for the appointment of a building official and deputies such as plans
examiners and inspectors. Appendix A provides standards for experience, training and certification for the building official and the
other staff mentioned in Chapter 1.
Appendix B Board of Appeals. Section 112 of Chapter 1 requires the establishment of a board of appeals to hear appeals regarding
determinations made by the building official. Appendix B provides qualification standards for members of the board as well as
operational procedures of such board.
Appendix C Group U–Agricultural Buildings. Appendix C provides a more liberal set of standards for the construction of agri-
cultural buildings, rather than strictly following the Utility building provision, reflective of their specific usage and limited occupant
load. The provisions of the appendix, when adopted, allow reasonable heights and areas commensurate with the risk of agricultural
buildings.
Appendix D Fire Districts. Fire districts have been a tool used to limit conflagration hazards in areas of a city with intense and con-
centrated development. More frequently used under the model codes which preceded the International Building Code (IBC), the
appendix is provided to allow jurisdictions to continue the designation and use of fire districts. Fire District standards restrict certain
occupancies within the district, as well as setting higher minimum construction standards.
Appendix E Supplemental Accessibility Requirements. The Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (U.S.
Access Board) has revised and updated its accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities covered by the Americans with Dis-
abilities Act (ADA) and the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA). Appendix E includes scoping requirements contained in the new
ADA/ABA Accessibility Guidelines that are not in Chapter 11 and not otherwise mentioned or mainstreamed throughout the code.
Items in the appendix deal with subjects not typically addressed in building codes (e.g., beds, room signage, transportation facili-
ties).
Appendix F Rodentproofing. The provisions of this appendix are minimum mechanical methods to prevent the entry of rodents
into a building. These standards, when used in conjunction with cleanliness and maintenance programs, can significantly reduce the
potential of rodents invading a building.
Appendix G Flood-resistant Construction. Appendix G is intended to fulfill the flood-plain management and administrative
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) that are not included in the code. Communities that adopt the Inter-
national Building Code (IBC) and Appendix G will meet the minimum requirements of NFIP as set forth in Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
Appendix H Signs. Appendix H gathers in one place the various code standards that regulate the construction and protection of out-
door signs. Whenever possible, the appendix provides standards in performance language, thus allowing the widest possible appli-
cation.
Appendix I Patio Covers. Appendix I provides standards applicable to the construction and use of patio covers. It is limited in
application to patio covers accessory to dwelling units. Covers of patios and other outdoor areas associated with restaurants, mer-
cantile buildings, offices, nursing homes or other nondwelling occupancies would be subject to standards in the main code and not
this appendix.
Appendix J Grading. Appendix J provides standards for the grading of properties. The appendix also provides standards for
administration and enforcement of a grading program including permit and inspection requirements. Appendix J was originally

xii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

developed in the 1960s and used for many years in jurisdictions throughout the western states. It is intended to provide consistent
and uniform code requirements anywhere grading is considered an issue.
Appendix K Administrative Provisions. Appendix K primarily provides administrative provisions for jurisdictions adopting and
enforcing NFPA 70—the National Electrical Code (NEC). The provisions contained in this appendix are compatible with adminis-
trative and enforcement provisions contained in Chapter 1 of the IBC and the other International Codes. Annex H of NFPA 70 also
contains administrative provisions for the NEC; however, some of its provisions are not compatible with IBC Chapter 1. Section
K110 also contains technical provisions that are unique to this appendix and are in addition to technical standards of NFPA 70.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xiii

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xiv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:43:57 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION . . . . 1

312

Utility and Miscellaneous Group U . . . . . . . . . . . 36

PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Section
101
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
102
Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND
ENFORCEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Department of Building Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Duties and Powers of Building Official . . . . . . . . . 2
Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Floor and Roof Design Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Submittal Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Temporary Structures and Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Certificate of Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Service Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Violations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Stop Work Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Unsafe Structures and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116

CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Section
201
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
202
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

CHAPTER 3 USE AND OCCUPANCY
CLASSIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

Section
301
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
302
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
303
Assembly Group A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
304
Business Group B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
305
Educational Group E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
306
Factory Group F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
307
High-hazard Group H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
308
Institutional Group I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
309 Mercantile Group M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
310
Residential Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
311
Storage Group S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

CHAPTER 4 SPECIAL DETAILED
REQUIREMENTS BASED ON
USE AND OCCUPANCY . . . . . . . . . . 37

Section
401
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
402
Covered Mall and Open Mall Buildings . . . . . . . 37
403
High-rise Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
404
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
405
Underground Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
406 Motor-vehicle-related Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . 45
407
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
408
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
409 Motion Picture Projection Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
410
Stages and Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
411
Special Amusement Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
412
Aircraft-related Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
413
Combustible Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
414
Hazardous Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
415
Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 . . . . . . . . . . 62
416
Application of Flammable Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . 74
417
Drying Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
418
Organic Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
419
Live/work Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
420
Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
421
Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
422
Ambulatory Health Care Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
423
Storm Shelters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

CHAPTER 5 GENERAL BUILDING
HEIGHTS AND AREAS . . . . . . . . . . . 79

Section
501
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
502
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
503
General Building Height and Area Limitations . . 79
504
Building Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
505 Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
506
Building Area Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
507
Unlimited Area Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
508 Mixed Use and Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
509
Special Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xvii

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:00 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 6 TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . 89
Section
601
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
602
Construction Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
603
Combustible Material in
Type I and II Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

CHAPTER 7 FIRE AND SMOKE
PROTECTION FEATURES . . . . . . . . 93

Section
701
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
702
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
703
Fire-resistance Ratings and Fire Tests . . . . . . . . . 94
704
Fire-resistance Rating of
Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Exterior Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Fire Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Fire Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Shaft Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Fire Partitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Smoke Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
Smoke Partitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Horizontal Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Fire-resistant Joint Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Opening Protectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
Ducts and Air Transfer Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Concealed Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Fire-resistance Requirements for Plaster . . . . . . 124
Thermal- and Sound-insulating Materials . . . . . 124
Prescriptive Fire Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Calculated Fire Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

705
706
707
708
709
710
711
712
713
714
715
716
717
718
719
720
721

INTERIOR FINISHES . . . . . . . . . . . 175

CHAPTER 8
Section
801
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
802
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
803 Wall and Ceiling Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
804
Interior Floor Finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
805
Combustible Materials in Type I
and II Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Decorative Materials and Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Acoustical Ceiling Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

806
807
808

CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS . . . 181
Section
901
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
902
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
903
Automatic Sprinkler Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
904
Alternative Automatic
Fire-extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
Standpipe Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Portable Fire Extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Fire Alarm and Detection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . 194
Emergency Alarm Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Smoke Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Smoke and Heat Vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Fire Command Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
Fire Department Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
Fire Pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
Emergency Responder Safety Features . . . . . . . 215
Emergency Responder Radio Coverage . . . . . . . 215

905
906
907
908
909
910
911
912
913
914
915

CHAPTER 10 MEANS OF EGRESS . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
Section
1001 Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
1002 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
1003 General Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
1004 Occupant Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
1005 Egress Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
1006 Means of Egress Illumination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
1007 Accessible Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
1008 Doors, Gates and Turnstiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
1009 Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
1010 Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
1011 Exit Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234
1012 Handrails . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
1013 Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
1014 Exit Access. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
1015 Exit and Exit Access Doorways . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
1016 Exit Access Travel Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
1017 Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
1018 Corridors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
1019 Egress Balconies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242
1020 Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
1021 Number of Exits and Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
1022 Exit Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
1023 Exit Passageways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
1024 Luminous Egress Path Markings . . . . . . . . . . . . 246

xviii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:01 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1025 Horizontal Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
1026 Exterior Exit Ramps and Stairways . . . . . . . . . . 248
1027 Exit Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
1028 Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
1029 Emergency Escape and Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 254

CHAPTER 11 ACCESSIBILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Section
1101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1103 Scoping Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
1104 Accessible Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258
1105 Accessible Entrances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
1106 Parking and Passenger Loading Facilities . . . . . 260
1107 Dwelling Units and Sleeping Units . . . . . . . . . . 260
1108 Special Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
1109 Other Features and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266
1110 Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269

CHAPTER 12 INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT . . . . . 271
Section
1201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1202 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1203 Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
1204 Temperature Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
1205 Lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
1206 Yards or Courts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1207 Sound Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1208 Interior Space Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1209 Access to Unoccupied Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
1210 Surrounding Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274

CHAPTER 13 ENERGY EFFICIENCY . . . . . . . . . . 275
Section
1301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275

CHAPTER 14 EXTERIOR WALLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
Section
1401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1403 Performance Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
1404 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278
1405 Installation of Wall Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
1406 Combustible Materials on the
Exterior Side of Exterior Walls . . . . . . . . . . . 283
1407 Metal Composite Materials (MCM) . . . . . . . . . . 284

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1408 Exterior Insulation and
Finish Systems (EIFS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285

CHAPTER 15 ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . 287

Section
1501 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1502 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1503 Weather Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
1504 Performance Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
1505 Fire Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
1506 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
1507 Requirements for Roof Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . 290
1508 Roof Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
1509 Rooftop Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
1510 Reroofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301

CHAPTER 16 STRUCTURAL DESIGN . . . . . . . . . 303
Section
1601 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
1602 Definitions and Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
1603 Construction Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
1604 General Design Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
1605 Load Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
1606 Dead Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
1607 Live Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
1608 Snow Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
1609 Wind Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
1610 Soil Lateral Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 331
1611 Rain Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
1612 Flood Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
1613 Earthquake Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
1614 Structural Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345

CHAPTER 17 STRUCTURAL TESTS AND
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS . . . . . . . . 367

Section
1701 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1702 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1703 Approvals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
1704 Special Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 368
1705 Statement of Special Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
1706 Special Inspections for Wind Requirements . . . 381
1707 Special Inspections for Seismic Resistance . . . . 381
1708 Structural Testing for Seismic Resistance . . . . . 382
1709 Contractor Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xix

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:01 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1710 Structural Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1711 Design Strengths of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1712 Alternative Test Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 383
1713 Test Safe Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1714 In-situ Load Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1715 Preconstruction Load Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 384
1716 Material and Test Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385

CHAPTER 18 SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS . . . . . 387
Section
1801 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1802 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1803 Geotechnical Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
1804 Excavation, Grading and Fill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
1805 Dampproofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . 390
1806 Presumptive Load-bearing Values of Soils . . . . 391
1807 Foundation Walls, Retaining Walls and
Embedded Posts and Poles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
1808 Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 398
1809 Shallow Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402
1810 Deep Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403

CHAPTER 19 CONCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
Section
1901 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1902 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1903 Specifications for Tests and Materials . . . . . . . . 417
1904 Durability Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
1905 Concrete Quality, Mixing and Placing . . . . . . . . 419
1906 Formwork, Embedded Pipes and
Construction Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1907 Details of Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1908 Modifications to ACI 318 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420
1909 Structural Plain Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
1910 Minimum Slab Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
1911 Anchorage to Concrete—Allowable
Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 424
1912 Anchorage to Concrete—Strength Design . . . . . 424
1913 Shotcrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 425
1914 Reinforced Gypsum Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426
1915 Concrete-filled Pipe Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426

CHAPTER 21 MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
Section
2101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
2102 Definitions and Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 429
2103 Masonry Construction Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . 432
2104 Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 433
2105 Quality Assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434
2106 Seismic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
2107 Allowable Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 435
2108 Strength Design of Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436
2109 Empirical Design of Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 436
2110 Glass Unit Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
2111 Masonry Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438
2112 Masonry Heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 440
2113 Masonry Chimneys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441

CHAPTER 22 STEEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
Section
2201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2202 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2203 Identification and Protection of Steel
for Structural Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2204 Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2205 Structural Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 447
2206 Steel Joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 448
2207 Steel Cable Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2208 Steel Storage Racks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2209 Cold-formed Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 449
2210 Cold-formed Steel Light-frame Construction . . 449

CHAPTER 23 WOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
Section
2301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
2302 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
2303 Minimum Standards and Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . 452
2304 General Construction Requirements . . . . . . . . . . 456
2305 General Design Requirements for
Lateral-force-resisting Systems . . . . . . . . . . . 466
2306 Allowable Stress Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 468
2307 Load and Resistance Factor Design . . . . . . . . . . 469
2308 Conventional Light-frame Construction . . . . . . 469

CHAPTER 20 ALUMINUM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
Section
2001 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
2002 Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427

CHAPTER 24 GLASS AND GLAZING . . . . . . . . . . 521
Section
2401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521

xx

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:02 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2403 General Requirements for Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2404 Wind, Snow, Seismic and
Dead Loads on Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 521
2405 Sloped Glazing and Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 523
2406 Safety Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 524
2407 Glass in Handrails and Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
2408 Glazing in Athletic Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
2409 Glass in Elevator Hoistways and
Elevator Cars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 527

CHAPTER 25 GYPSUM BOARD
AND PLASTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529

Section
2501 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2502 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2503 Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2504 Vertical and Horizontal Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . 529
2505 Shear Wall Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 529
2506 Gypsum Board Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2507 Lathing and Plastering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2508 Gypsum Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
2509 Gypsum Board in Showers and
Water Closets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 531
2510 Lathing and Furring for Cement
Plaster (Stucco) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
2511 Interior Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 532
2512 Exterior Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533
2513 Exposed Aggregate Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 533

CHAPTER 26 PLASTIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
Section
2601 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2602 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2603 Foam Plastic Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 535
2604 Interior Finish and Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 538
2605 Plastic Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 539
2606 Light-transmitting Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 539
2607 Light-transmitting Plastic Wall Panels . . . . . . . . 540
2608 Light-transmitting Plastic Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . 541
2609 Light-transmitting Plastic Roof Panels . . . . . . . 541
2610 Light-transmitting Plastic Skylight Glazing . . . 542
2611 Light-transmitting Plastic Interior Signs . . . . . . 542
2612 Fiber Reinforced Polymer and
Fiberglass-reinforced Polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
2613 Reflective Plastic Core Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . 544

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 27 ELECTRICAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
Section
2701 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 545
2702 Emergency and Standby Power Systems . . . . . . 545

CHAPTER 28 MECHANICAL SYSTEMS . . . . . . . 547
Section
2801 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 547

CHAPTER 29 PLUMBING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . 549
Section
2901 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
2902 Minimum Plumbing Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 549
2903 Toilet Room Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 552

CHAPTER 30 ELEVATORS AND
CONVEYING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . 553

Section
3001 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3002 Hoistway Enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3003 Emergency Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 553
3004 Hoistway Venting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
3005 Conveying Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 554
3006 Machine Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3007 Fire Service Access Elevator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
3008 Occupant Evacuation Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . 556

CHAPTER 31 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . 559
Section
3101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
3102 Membrane Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
3103 Temporary Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 560
3104 Pedestrian Walkways and Tunnels . . . . . . . . . . . 560
3105 Awnings and Canopies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 561
3106 Marquees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3107 Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3108 Telecommunication and Broadcast Towers . . . . 562
3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and
Safety Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 562
3110 Automatic Vehicular Gates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 563

CHAPTER 32 ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY . . . . . . . . 565

Section
3201 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 565
3202 Encroachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 565

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xxi

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:02 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 33 SAFEGUARDS DURING
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567

APPENDIX C GROUP U—AGRICULTURAL
BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611

Section
3301 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3302 Construction Safeguards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3303 Demolition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3304 Site Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3305 Sanitary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
3306 Protection of Pedestrians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 568
3307 Protection of Adjoining Property . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3308 Temporary Use of Streets, Alleys and
Public Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3309 Fire Extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3310 Means of Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3311 Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 569
3312 Automatic Sprinkler System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 570

CHAPTER 34 EXISTING STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . 571
Section
3401 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
3402 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 571
3403 Additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 572
3404 Alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 572
3405 Repairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 573
3406 Fire Escapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 574
3407 Glass Replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3408 Change of Occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3409 Historic Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3410 Moved Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
3411 Accessibility for Existing Buildings . . . . . . . . . 575
3412 Compliance Alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 577

CHAPTER 35 REFERENCED STANDARDS . . . . . 587

APPENDIX A EMPLOYEE
QUALIFICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607

Section
A101 Building Official Qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607
A102 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 607

APPENDIX B BOARD OF APPEALS . . . . . . . . . . . 609
Section
B101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 609

Section
C101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C102 Allowable Height and Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C103 Mixed Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611
C104 Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 611

APPENDIX D FIRE DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
Section
D101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
D102 Building Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 613
D103 Changes to Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
D104 Buildings Located Partially in the
Fire District . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 614
D105 Exceptions to Restrictions in Fire District . . . . . 614
D106 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 615

APPENDIX E SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617

Section
E101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E103 Accessible Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E104 Special Occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 617
E105 Other Features and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
E106 Telephones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 618
E107 Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 619
E108 Bus Stops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 620
E109 Transportation Facilities and Stations . . . . . . . . 620
E110 Airports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 621
E111 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 621

APPENDIX F RODENTPROOFING . . . . . . . . . . . . 623
Section
F101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 623

APPENDIX G FLOOD-RESISTANT
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625

Section
G101 Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G102 Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G103 Powers and Duties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625
G104 Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626
G105 Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626

xxii

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

6

TABLE OF CONTENTS

J107 Fills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J108 Setbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J109 Drainage and Terracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640
J110 Erosion Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640
J111 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 640

APPENDIX K ADMINISTRATIVE
PROVISIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641

Section
K101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K102 Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K103 Permits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 641
K104 Construction Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K105 Alternative Engineered Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K106 Required Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K107 Prefabricated Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 642
K108 Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K109 Reconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K110 Condemning Electrical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
K111 Electrical Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643

INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 645

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

G201 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 627
G301 Subdivisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G401 Site Improvement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G501 Manufactured Homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G601 Recreational Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 628
G701 Tanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G801 Other Building Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G901 Temporary Structures and
Temporary Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 629
G1001 Utility and Miscellaneous Group U . . . . . . . . . . 629
G1101 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 630

APPENDIX H SIGNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
Section
H101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H103 Location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H104 Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 631
H105 Design and Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H106 Electrical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H107 Combustible Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H108 Animated Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H109 Ground Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 632
H110 Roof Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H111 Wall Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H112 Projecting Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 633
H113 Marquee Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634
H114 Portable Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634
H115 Referenced Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 634

APPENDIX I PATIO COVERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
Section
I101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I103 Exterior Openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635
I104 Structural Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 635

APPENDIX J GRADING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
Section
J101 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J102 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J103 Permits Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J104 Permit Application and Submittals . . . . . . . . . . . 637
J105
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638
J106 Excavations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 638

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xxiii

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xxiv

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0c_toc_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)c_toc_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:33:03 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ORDINANCE

The International Codes are designed and promulgated to be adopted by reference by ordinance. Jurisdictions wishing to adopt the
2009 International Building Code as an enforceable regulation governing structures and premises should ensure that certain factual
information is included in the adopting ordinance at the time adoption is being considered by the appropriate governmental body.
The following sample adoption ordinance addresses several key elements of a code adoption ordinance, including the information
required for insertion into the code text.

SAMPLE ORDINANCE FOR ADOPTION OF
THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
ORDINANCE NO.________

An ordinance of the [JURISDICTION] adopting the 2009 edition of the International Building Code, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in the [JURISDIC-
TION]; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; repealing Ordinance No. ______ of the [JURISDICTION]
and all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith.
The [GOVERNING BODY] of the [JURISDICTION] does ordain as follows:
Section 1. That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the [TITLE OF JURISDICTION’S KEEPER OF
RECORDS] of [NAME OF JURISDICTION], being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including
Appendix Chapters [FILL IN THE APPENDIX CHAPTERS BEING ADOPTED] (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2009
edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the [JURISDICTION], in
the State of [STATE NAME] for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the
[JURISDICTION] are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, inser-
tions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Section 2. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 1612.3. Insert: [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 1612.3. Insert: [DATE OF ISSUANCE]
Section 3412.2. Insert: [DATE IN ONE LOCATION]

Section 3. That Ordinance No. ______ of [JURISDICTION] entitled [FILL IN HERE THE COMPLETE TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE OR
ORDINANCES IN EFFECT AT THE PRESENT TIME SO THAT THEY WILL BE REPEALED BY DEFINITE MENTION] and all other ordinances

or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 4. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The [GOVERNING BODY] hereby declares that it
would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section 5. That nothing in this ordinance or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of this ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
Section 6. That the [JURISDICTION’S KEEPER OF RECORDS] is hereby ordered and directed to cause this ordinance to be published.
(An additional provision may be required to direct the number of times the ordinance is to be published and to specify that it is to be
in a newspaper in general circulation. Posting may also be required.)
Section 7. That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted
hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect [TIME PERIOD] from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

xv

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:52 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

xvi

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

0b_prelim_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)b_prelim_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:14:52 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 1

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION

SECTION 101
GENERAL

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building
Code of [NAME OF JURISDICTION], hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the con-
struction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three stories above grade plane in height with a sepa-
rate means of egress and their accessory structures shall
comply with the International Residential Code.
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not
apply unless specifically adopted.
101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the mini-
mum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and
general welfare through structural strength, means of egress
facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation,
energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire
and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to
provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders dur-
ing emergency operations.
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections
101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code
shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas
Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the
point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping
systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet
connections of appliances and the installation and operation
of residential and commercial gas appliances and related
accessories.
101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the International
Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations,
repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurte-
nances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-condi-
tioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other
energy-related systems.
101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International
Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration,
repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including

➡

equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances,
and where connected to a water or sewage system and all
aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the Inter-
national Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to pri-
vate sewage disposal systems.
101.4.4 Property maintenance. The provisions of the

International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to
existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities;
light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire
safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and struc-
tures.
101.4.5 Fire prevention. The provisions of the Interna-
tional Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating
to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire
and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of
structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous
to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of struc-
tures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm
systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises
from occupancy or operation.
101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy
Conservation Code shall apply to all matters governing the
design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

SECTION 102
APPLICABILITY

102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general
requirement and a specific requirement, the specific require-
ment shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different
sections of this code specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern.
102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be
deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or sec-
tion numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by
number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or
provision of this code.
102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and stan-
dards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such
reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this
code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply.
102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision
of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the
effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provi-
sions.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

1

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any struc-
ture existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be per-
mitted to continue without change, except as is specifically
covered in this code, the International Property Maintenance
Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary
by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.

PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of
Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge
thereof shall be known as the building official.
103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed
by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.
103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures
of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing
authority, the building official shall have the authority to
appoint a deputy building official, the related technical offi-
cers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such
employees shall have powers as delegated by the building offi-
cial. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the Inter-
national Property Maintenance Code.

SECTION 104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building
official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and
procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this
code.
104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall
receive applications, review construction documents and issue
permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving
of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such
permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the pro-
visions of this code.
104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this
code.
104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the
required inspections, or the building official shall have the
authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies
or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved
agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary
to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the
approval of the appointing authority.

104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under this code.
104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspec-
tion to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the build-
ing official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a
structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or
in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is autho-
rized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to
inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided
that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials
be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such struc-
ture or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person
having charge or control of the structure or premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep
official records of applications received, permits and certifi-
cates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices
and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official
records for the period required for retention of public records.
104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of
appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this
code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or
other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of
any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or
employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provi-
sions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of
the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings.
The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursu-
ance of the provisions of this code.
104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equip-
ment and devices approved by the building official shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used
materials which meet the requirements of this code for new
materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless approved by the building official.
104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficul-
ties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
building official shall have the authority to grant modifications
for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s
representative, provided the building official shall first find that
special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does
not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural
requirements. The details of action granting modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of
building safety.

2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of con-
struction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not
intended to prevent the installation of any material or to pro-
hibit any design or method of construction not specifically pre-
scribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has
been approved. An alternative material, design or method of
construction shall be approved where the building official finds
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the
intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
104.11.1 Research reports. Supporting data, where neces-
sary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not
specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid
research reports from approved sources.
104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence
that a material or method does not conform to the require-
ments of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for
alternative materials or methods, the building official shall
have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance
to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods
shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the building official shall approve the testing pro-
cedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency.
Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building offi-
cial for the period required for retention of public records.

SECTION 105
PERMITS

105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends
to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change
the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which
is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done,
shall first make application to the building official and obtain
the required permit.
105.1.1 Annual permit. In lieu of an individual permit for
each alteration to an already approved electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing installation, the building official is
authorized to issue an annual permit upon application there-
for to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing
one or more qualified tradepersons in the building, structure
or on the premises owned or operated by the applicant for
the permit.

105.1.2 Annual permit records. The person to whom an
annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alter-
ations made under such annual permit. The building official
shall have access to such records at all times or such records
shall be filed with the building official as designated.
105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authori-
zation for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as
tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square
feet (11 m2).
2. Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
3. Oil derricks.
4. Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to
the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or
impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the
capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L)
and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 2:1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches
(762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any
basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, coun-
ter tops and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group
R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and are
installed entirely above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or
agricultural purposes, not including service sys-
tems.
11. Swings and other playground equipment accessory
to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that
do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from
the exterior wall and do not require additional sup-
port of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.
13. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, coun-
ters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753
mm) in height.
Electrical:
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, includ-
ing the replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved per-
manently installed receptacles.
Radio and television transmitting stations: The provi-
sions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment
used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply
to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the
installations of towers and antennas.
Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be
required for the installation of any temporary system

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

3

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:14 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

required for the testing or servicing of electrical equip-
ment or apparatus.
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter
approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating
or cooling equipment regulated by this code.
5. Replacement of any part that does not alter its
approval or make it unsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10
pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by
motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing:
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed
trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe
becomes defective and it becomes necessary to
remove and replace the same with new material, such
work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in
this code.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in
pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstal-
lation of water closets, provided such repairs do not
involve or require the replacement or rearrangement
of valves, pipes or fixtures.
105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replace-
ments and repairs must be performed in an emergency situa-
tion, the permit application shall be submitted within the
next working business day to the building official.
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building offi-
cial is not required for ordinary repairs to structures,
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved porta-
ble electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away
of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cut-
ting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rear-
rangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe,
water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste,
vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be
required for the installation, alteration or repair of genera-
tion, transmission, distribution or metering or other related

equipment that is under the ownership and control of public
service agencies by established right.
105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the appli-
cant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form
furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose.
Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the per-
mit for which application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done by legal description, street address or similar
description that will readily identify and definitely locate
the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other
information as required in Section 107.
5. State the valuation of the proposed work.
6. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized
agent.
7. Give such other data and information as required by the
building official.

105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall
examine or cause to be examined applications for permits
and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after fil-
ing. If the application or the construction documents do not
conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building
official shall reject such application in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code
and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building
official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for
a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have
been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such
application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the building official is authorized to
grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods
not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any
violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other
ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or
other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issu-
ance of a permit based on construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the
correction of errors in the construction documents and other
data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occu-
pancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of
any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid
unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is com-
menced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work autho-
rized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The

4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each.
The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause demonstrated.
105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the pro-
visions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on
the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or
in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provi-
sions of this code.
105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall
be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the pro-
ject.

SECTION 106
FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS

106.1 Live loads posted. Where the live loads for which each
floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building
is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such
design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in
that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs.
It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices
106.2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of
occupancy required by Section 111 shall not be issued until the
floor load signs, required by Section 106.1, have been installed.
106.3 Restrictions on loading. It shall be unlawful to place, or
cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building,
structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by
this code.

SECTION 107
SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS

107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construc-
tion documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical
report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets
with each permit application. The construction documents
shall be prepared by a registered design professional where
required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project
is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the build-
ing official is authorized to require additional construction doc-
uments to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not
required to be prepared by a registered design professional
if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such
that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents
shall be in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5.
107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Con-
struction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon
suitable material. Electronic media documents are permit-
ted to be submitted when approved by the building official.
Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indi-
cate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regula-
tions, as determined by the building official.

107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop draw-
ings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to
indicate conformance to this code and the construction docu-
ments and shall be approved prior to the start of system instal-
lation. Shop drawings shall contain all
information as
required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

107.2.3 Means of egress. The construction documents shall
show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and
character of all portions of the means of egress in compli-
ance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupan-
cies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1,
the construction
documents shall designate the number of occupants to be
accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents
for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in
sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code.
The construction documents shall provide details of the
exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, inter-
sections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, con-
trol joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of
drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around
openings.

The construction documents shall
include manufac-
turer’s installation instructions that provide supporting doc-
umentation that the proposed penetration and opening
details described in the construction documents maintain
the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior
wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as
the test procedure used.

107.2.5 Site plan. The construction documents submitted
with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a
site plan showing to scale the size and location of new con-
struction and existing structures on the site, distances from
lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed fin-
ished grades and, as applicable,
flood hazard areas,
floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be
drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey.
In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construc-
tion to be demolished and the location and size of existing
structures and construction that are to remain on the site or
plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify
the requirement for a site plan when the application for per-
mit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

107.2.5.1 Design flood elevations. Where design flood
elevations are not specified, they shall be established in
accordance with Section 1612.3.1.

107.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall
examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal
documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether
the construction indicated and described is in accordance with
the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordi-
nances.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

5

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the

building official issues a permit, the construction documents
shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for
Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other
set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site
of work and shall be open to inspection by the building offi-
cial or a duly authorized representative.

107.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require
changes in the construction documents, construction or des-
ignated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit
has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully autho-
rized, and the construction of which has been pursued in
good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this
code and has not been abandoned.

107.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is autho-
rized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or
any other part of a building or structure before the construc-
tion documents for the whole building or structure have
been submitted, provided that adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with perti-
nent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit
for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure
shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building oper-
ation and without assurance that a permit for the entire
structure will be granted.

107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.

107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents
be prepared by a registered design professional, the
building official shall be authorized to require the owner
to engage and designate on the building permit applica-
tion a registered design professional who shall act as the
registered design professional in responsible charge. If
the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a
substitute registered design professional in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required of the origi-
nal registered design professional in responsible charge.
The building official shall be notified in writing by the
owner if the registered design professional in responsible
charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the
duties.

The registered design professional in responsible
charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinat-
ing submittal documents prepared by others, including
phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility
with the design of the building.

107.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this
section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions
of the design that are not submitted at the time of the
application and that are to be submitted to the building
official within a specified period.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior
approval of the building official. The registered design
professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred
submittals on the construction documents for review by
the building official.

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be sub-
mitted to the registered design professional in responsi-
ble charge who shall review them and forward them to
the building official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and
found to be in general conformance to the design of the
building. The deferred submittal items shall not be
installed until the deferred submittal documents have
been approved by the building official.

107.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be
installed in accordance with the approved construction docu-
ments, and any changes made during construction that are not
in compliance with the approved construction documents shall
be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.

107.5 Retention of construction documents. One set of

approved construction documents shall be retained by the
building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date
of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or
local laws.

SECTION 108
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a
permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such per-
mits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be per-
mitted for more than 180 days. The building official is
authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
108.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall con-
form to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress,
accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of
this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and gen-
eral welfare.
108.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to
give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of
an electric installation before such installation has been fully
completed and the final certificate of completion has been
issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall
comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting,
heat or power in NFPA 70.
108.4 Termination of approval. The building official is autho-
rized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use
and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

SECTION 109
FEES

109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the
fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment
to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been
paid.
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, elec-
trical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations
requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the
applicable governing authority.

6

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:15 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit
shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application.
Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including
materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such
as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and perma-
nent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valu-
ation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be
denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to
meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit
valuation shall be set by the building official.

109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person
who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical,
gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the neces-
sary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building
official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construc-
tion, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in
connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a
building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the
permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by
law.

109.6 Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish
a refund policy.

SECTION 110
INSPECTIONS

110.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection by the building official
and such construction or work shall remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a
result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordi-
nances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of
other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be
the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required
to allow inspection.

110.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the
building official is authorized to examine or cause to be exam-
ined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has
been filed.

110.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon noti-
fication, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections
110.3.1 through 110.3.10.

110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and
foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for
footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is
in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall
be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation
shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in
accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on
the job.

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Con-
crete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after
in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service
equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is
placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon
placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and
prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certifica-
tion required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the
building official.

110.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be
made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing,
fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys
and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough elec-
trical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are
approved.

110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and
gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and
gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before
any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasten-
ers are taped and finished.

Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resis-
tance-rated assembly or a shear assembly.

110.3.6 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations. Protec-
tion of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated
assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not
be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

110.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall
be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall
include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope
insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value, duct sys-
tem R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment effi-
ciency.

110.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections
specified above, the building official is authorized to make
or require other inspections of any construction work to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and
other laws that are enforced by the department of building
safety.

110.3.9 Special inspections. For special inspections, see
Section 1704.

110.3.10 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be
made after all work required by the building permit is com-
pleted.

110.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized
to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided
such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and
reliability.

110.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of
the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the
building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be
the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for
inspections of such work that are required by this code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

7

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:16 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

110.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the
point indicated in each successive inspection without first
obtaining the approval of the building official. The building
official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections
and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or
her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any
portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion
shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the build-
ing official.

building official shall set a time period during which the tempo-
rary certificate of occupancy is valid.
111.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in
writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or com-
pletion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the
certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect infor-
mation supplied, or where it is determined that the building or
structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

SECTION 111
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be
used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall
be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a viola-
tion of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction.
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for
work exempt from permits under Section 105.2.
111.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects
the building or structure and finds no violations of the provi-
sions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the depart-
ment of building safety, the building official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy that contains the following:
1. The building permit number.
2. The address of the structure.
3. The name and address of the owner.
4. A description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate is issued.
5. A statement that the described portion of the structure
has been inspected for compliance with the require-
ments of this code for the occupancy and division of
occupancy and the use for which the proposed occu-
pancy is classified.
6. The name of the building official.
7. The edition of the code under which the permit was
issued.
8. The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provi-
sions of Chapter 3.
9. The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.
10. The design occupant load.
11. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether
the sprinkler system is required.
12. Any special stipulations and conditions of the building
permit.
111.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is autho-
rized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the
completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided
that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The

SECTION 112
SERVICE UTILITIES
112.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make
connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to
any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a
permit is required, until released by the building official.
112.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have
the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the
building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.
112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building
official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by
this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in
Section 101.4 in case of emergency where necessary to elimi-
nate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such util-
ity connection has been made without the approval required by
Section 112.1 or 112.2. The building official shall notify the
serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant
of the building, structure or service system of the decision to
disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to
disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure
or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practi-
cal thereafter.

SECTION 113
BOARD OF APPEALS

113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the building official rela-
tive to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall
be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of
appeals shall be appointed by the applicable governing author-
ity and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt
rules of procedure for conducting its business.
113.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly inter-
preted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an
equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The
board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this
code.
113.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass
on matters pertaining to building construction and are not
employees of the jurisdiction.

8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:16 AM

8

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION

tilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dan-
gerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve ille-
gal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken
down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems
necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure
that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.
116.2 Record. The building official shall cause a report to be
filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occu-
pancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
116.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building offi-
cial shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the
structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed
unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be
made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe
structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to
the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the
order.
116.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed prop-
erly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner per-
sonally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the
owner at the last known address with the return receipt
requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by
local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure
shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
116.5 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to
be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a
safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or addi-
tions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the res-
toration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or
change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of
Section 105.2.2 and Chapter 34.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 114
VIOLATIONS

114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move,
remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equip-
ment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in con-
flict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
114.2 Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to
serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible
for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair,
moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in viola-
tion of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal
action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
114.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation
of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant thereto.
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provi-
sion of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or
structure in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to pen-
alties as prescribed by law.

SECTION 115
STOP WORK ORDER

115.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any
work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either
contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe,
the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the
owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance
of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease.
The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the
conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to
resume.
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to pen-
alties as prescribed by law.

SECTION 116
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

116.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or
hereafter become unsafe, insanitary or deficient because of
inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ven-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

9

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:17 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

10

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

01_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 10:52:17 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 2

DEFINITIONS

SECTION 201
GENERAL

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the
meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes
the plural and the plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not
defined in this code and are defined in the International Fuel
Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical
Code or International Plumbing Code, such terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined
through the methods authorized by this section, such terms
shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.

SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS

AAC MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
ACCESSIBLE. See Section 1102.1.
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS. See Section 1002.1.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE. See Section 1102.1.
ACCESSIBLE UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
ACCREDITATION BODY. See Section 2302.1.
ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height
of a building or structure.
ADHERED MASONRY VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
ADOBE CONSTRUCTION. See Section 2102.1.
Adobe, stabilized. See Section 2102.1.
Adobe, unstabilized. See Section 2102.1.
[F] AEROSOL. See Section 307.2.
Level 1 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
Level 2 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
Level 3 aerosol products. See Section 307.2.
[F] AEROSOL CONTAINER. See Section 307.2.
AGGREGATE. See Section 1502.1.
AGRICULTURAL, BUILDING. A structure designed and
constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, live-
stock or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be
a place of human habitation or a place of employment where
agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor
shall it be a place used by the public.

AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE. See Section 3102.2.
AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE. See Section 3102.2.
Double skin. See Section 3102.2.
Single skin. See Section 3102.2.
AISLE. See Section 1002.1.
AISLE ACCESSWAY. See Section 1002.1.
[F] ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. See Section
902.1.
[F] ALARM SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. See Section
902.1.
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. See Section 1602.1.
ALTERATION. Any construction or renovation to an existing
structure other than repair or addition.
ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. See Section 1002.1.
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Buildings or
portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric,
nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individu-
als who are rendered incapable of self-preservation.
ANCHOR. See Section 2102.1.
ANCHOR BUILDING. See Section 402.2.
ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
ANNULAR SPACE. See Section 702.1.
[F] ANNUNCIATOR. See Section 902.1.
APPROVED. Acceptable to the code official or authority hav-
ing jurisdiction.
APPROVED AGENCY. See Section 1702.1.
APPROVED FABRICATOR. See Section 1702.1.
APPROVED SOURCE. An independent person, firm or cor-
poration, approved by the building official, who is competent
and experienced in the application of engineering principles to
materials, methods or systems analyses.
ARCHITECTURAL TERRA COTTA. See Section 2102.1.
AREA (for masonry). See Section 2102.1.
Bedded. See Section 2102.1.
Gross cross-sectional. See Section 2102.1.
Net cross-sectional. See Section 2102.1.
AREA, BUILDING. See Section 502.1.
AREA OF REFUGE. See Section 1002.1.
AREAWAY. A subsurface space adjacent to a building open at
the top or protected at the top by a grating or guard.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. See Section 310.2, “Res-
idential Care/Assisted living facilities.”

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:24 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

ATRIUM. See Section 404.1.1.
ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top story
and the roof rafters.
[F] AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.
See Section 902.1.
AUTOCLAVED AERATED CONCRETE (AAC). See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC. See Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.
See Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. See
Section 902.1.
[F] AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. See Section
902.1.
[F] AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. See Section
902.1.
AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather
protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported by
the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of
a lightweight frame structure over which a covering is attached.
BACKING. See Section 1402.1.
[F] BALED COTTON. See Section 307.2.
[F] BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED. See Section
307.2.
BALLAST. See Section 1502.1.
[F] BARRICADE. See Section 307.2.
Artificial barricade. See Section 307.2.
Natural barricade. See Section 307.2.
BASE FLOOD. See Section 1612.2.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. See Section 1612.2.
BASEMENT (for other than flood loads). See Section 502.1.
BASEMENT (for flood loads). See Section 1612.2.
BEARING WALL STRUCTURE. See Section 1614.2.
BED JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
BLEACHERS. See Section 1002.1.
BOARDING HOUSE. See Section 310.2.
[F] BOILING POINT. See Section 307.2.
BOND BEAM. See Section 2102.1.
BRACED WALL LINE. See Section 2302.1.
BRACED WALL PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
BRICK. See Section 2102.1.
Calcium silicate (sand lime brick). See Section 2102.1.
Clay or shale. See Section 2102.1.
Concrete. See Section 2102.1.
BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING ELEMENT. See Section 702.1.

➡

➡

BUILDING LINE. The line established by law, beyond which
a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by
law.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated
authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
this code, or a duly authorized representative.
BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. See Section 1502.1.
CABLE-RESTRAINED , AIR-SUPPORTED STRUC-
TURE. See Section 3102.2.
CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection
of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that pro-
vides weather protection, identity or decoration, and shall be
structurally independent or supported by attachment to a build-
ing on one end and by not less than one stanchion on the outer
end.
[F] CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.
See Section 902.1.
CAST STONE. See Section 2102.1.
[F] CEILING LIMIT. See Section 902.1.
CEILING RADIATION DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
CELL. See Section 408.1.1.
CELL (masonry). See Section 2102.1.
CELL TIER. See Section 408.1.1.
CEMENT PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET. See Section 721.1.1.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. See Section 1702.1.
CHILD CARE FACILITIES. See Section 308.3.1.
CHIMNEY. See Section 2102.1.
CHIMNEY TYPES. See Section 2102.1.
High-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
Low-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
Masonry type. See Section 2102.1.
Medium-heat appliance type. See Section 2102.1.
CIRCULATION PATH. See Section 1102.1.
[F] CLEAN AGENT. See Section 902.1.
CLEANOUT. See Section 2102.1.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. See Section 304.1.1.
[F] CLOSED SYSTEM. See Section 307.2.
COLLAR JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
COLLECTOR. See Section 2302.1.
COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER. See Section
702.1.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE DUST. See Section 307.2.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS. See Section 307.2.
[F] COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID. See Section 307.2.
Class II. See Section 307.2.

➡

➡

12

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:24 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

Class IIIA. See Section 307.2.
Class IIIB. See Section 307.2.
COMMON USE. See Section 1102.1.
COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. See Section
1002.1.
[F] COMPRESSED GAS. See Section 307.2.
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
CONCRETE, CARBONATE AGGREGATE. See Section
721.1.1.
CONCRETE, CELLULAR. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, LIGHTWEIGHT AGGREGATE. See Sec-
tion 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, PERLITE. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT. See Section 721.1.1.
CONCRETE, SILICEOUS AGGREGATE. See Section
721.1.1.
CONCRETE, VERMICULITE. See Section 721.1.1.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. See Section 310.2.
CONNECTOR. See Section 2102.1.
[F] CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. See Section
902.1.
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. Written, graphic and
pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the
design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of
a project necessary for obtaining a building permit.
CONSTRUCTION TYPES. See Section 602.
Type I. See Section 602.2.
Type II. See Section 602.2.
Type III. See Section 602.3.
Type IV. See Section 602.4.
Type V. See Section 602.5.
[F] CONTINUOUS GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. See
Section 415.2.
[F] CONTROL AREA. See Section 307.2.
CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH MATER IAL . A
self-compacted,  cementitious  material  used  primarily  as  a
backfill in place of compacted fill.
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION.
See Section 2302.1.
CORRIDOR. See Section 1002.1.
CORROSION RESISTANCE. The ability of a material to
withstand deterioration of its surface or its properties when
exposed to its environment.
[F] CORROSIVE. See Section 307.2.

DEFINITIONS

➡

COURT. An open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky,
bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls or
other enclosing devices.
COVER. See Section 2102.1.
COVERED MALL BUILDING. See Section 402.2.
Mall. See Section 402.2.
Open mall. See Section 402.2.
Open mall building. See Section 402.2.
CRIPPLE WALL. See Section 2302.1.
[F] CRYOGENIC FLUID. See Section 307.2.
DALLE GLASS. See Section 2402.1.
DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
DANGEROUS. See Section 3402.1.
[F] DAY BOX. See Section 307.2.
DEAD LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
DECORATIVE GLASS. See Section 2402.1.
[F] DECORATIVE MATERIALS. All materials applied
over the building interior finish for decorative, acoustical or
other effect (such as curtains, draperies, fabrics, streamers and
surface coverings), and all other materials utilized for decora-
tive effect (such as batting, cloth, cotton, hay, stalks, straw,
vines, leaves, trees, moss and similar items), including foam
plastics and materials containing foam plastics. Decorative
materials do not include floor coverings, ordinary window
shades, interior finish and materials 0.025 inch (0.64 mm) or
less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a
substrate.
DEEP FOUNDATION. See Section 1802.1.
[F] DEFLAGRATION. See Section 307.2.
[F] DELUGE SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
DESIGN DISPLACEMENT. See Section 1908.1.1.
DESIGN EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION. See Sec-
tion 1613.2.
DESIGN FLOOD. See Section 1612.2.
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. See Section 1612.2.
DESIGN STRENGTH. See Section 1602.1.
DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM. See Section 1702.1.
[F] DETACHED BUILDING. See Section 415.2.
DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL.
See Section 1908.1.1.
DETECTABLE WARNING. See Section 1102.1.
[F] DETECTOR, HEAT. See Section 902.1.
[F] DETONATION. See Section 307.2.
DETOXIFICATION FACILITY. See Section 308.3.1.
DIAPHRAGM. See Sections 1602.1 and 2302.1.
Diaphragm, blocked. See Section 1602.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

13

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:25 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

Diaphragm, boundary. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, chord. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, flexible. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, rigid. See Section 1602.1.
Diaphragm, unblocked. See Section 2302.1.
DIMENSIONS. See Section 2102.1.
Actual. See Section 2102.1.
Nominal. See Section 2102.1.
Specified. See Section 2102.1.
[F] DISPENSING. See Section 307.2.
DOOR, BALANCED. See Section 1002.1.
DORMITORY. See Section 310.2.
DRAFTSTOP. See Section 702.1.
DRAG STRUT. See Section 2302.1.
DRILLED SHAFT. See Section 1802.1.
Socketed drilled shaft. See Section 1802.1.
[F] DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. See
Section 902.1.
DRY FLOODPROOFING. See Section 1612.2.
DURATION OF LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling
units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let
or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, inde-
pendent living facilities for one or more persons, including per-
manent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, MULTI-
STORY. See Section 1102.1.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE A. See
Section 1102.1.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE B. See
Section 1102.1.
EGRESS COURT. See Section 1002.1.
ELEVATOR GROUP. See Section 902.1.
[F] EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
[F] EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION. See Section
415.2.
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. See
Section 1002.1.
[F] EMERGENCY VOICE /ALARM COMMUNICA-
TIONS. See Section 902.1.
EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. See Section 1102.1.
EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. See Section 502.1.
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. See Section 1602.1.
[F] EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE. See Section 415.2.

14

➡

EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. See Section 1612.2.
EXISTING STRUCTURE. See Sections 1612.2 and 3402.1.
EXIT. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ACCESS. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT DISCHARGE. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT ENCLOSURE. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT, HORIZONTAL. See Section 1002.1.
EXIT PASSAGEWAY. See Section 1002.1.
EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING. See Section
802.1.
[F] EXPLOSION. See Section 307.2.
[F] EXPLOSIVE. See Section 307.2.
High explosive. See Section 307.2.
Low explosive. See Section 307.2.
Mass detonating explosives. See Section 307.2.
UN/DOTn Class 1 Explosives. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.1. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.2. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.3. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.4. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.5. See Section 307.2.
Division 1.6. See Section 307.2.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEM (EIFS).
See Section 1402.1.
EXTER IOR INSULATION AND F IN ISH SYSTEM
(EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
EXTERIOR WALL. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR WALL COVERING. See Section 1402.1.
EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE. See Section 1402.1.
F RATING. See Section 702.1.
FABRIC PARTITION. See Section 1602.1.
FABRICATED ITEM. See Section 1702.1.
[F] FABRICATION AREA. See Section 415.2.
FACILITY. See Section 1102.1.
FACTORED LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
FIBER CEMENT SIDING. See Section 1402.1.
FIBER REINFORCED POLYMER. See Section 2602.1.
Fiberglass Reinforced Polymer. See Section 2602.1.
FIBERBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. See Section 902.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:25 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
FIRE AREA. See Section 902.1.
FIRE BARRIER. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE COMMAND CENTER. See Section 902.1.
FIRE DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. See Section 902.1.
FIRE DOOR. See Section 702.1.
FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FIRE EXIT HARDWARE. See Section 1002.1.
[F] FIRE LANE. A road or other passageway developed to
allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessar-
ily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.
FIRE PARTITION. See Section 702.1.
FIRE PROTECTION RATING. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. See Section 902.1.
FIRE RESISTANCE. See Section 702.1.
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. See Section 702.1.
FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM. See Section 702.1.
[F] FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. See Section 902.1.
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. See Section 702.1.
FIRE WALL. See Section 702.1.
FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FIREBLOCKING. See Section 702.1.
FIREPLACE. See Section 2102.1.
FIREPLACE THROAT. See Section 2102.1.
[F] FIREWORKS. See Section 307.2.
Fireworks, 1.3G. See Section 307.2.
Fireworks, 1.4G. See Section 307.2.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). See Section 412.2.
FLAME SPREAD. See Section 802.1.
FLAME SPREAD INDEX. See Section 802.1.
[F] FLAMMABLE GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUID. See Section 307.2.
Class IA. See Section 307.2.
Class IB. See Section 307.2.
Class IC. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE MATERIAL. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE SOLID. See Section 307.2.
[F] FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES. See Section 415.2.
[F] FLASH POINT. See Section 307.2.
FLIGHT. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOD OR FLOODING. See Section 1612.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

➡

DEFINITIONS

FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. See Sec-
tion 1612.2.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA SUBJECT TO HIGH-VELOC-
ITY WAVE ACTION. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). See Section
1612.2.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. See Section 1612.2.
FLOODWAY. See Section 1612.2.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOR AREA, NET. See Section 1002.1.
FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
FLY GALLERY. See Section 410.2.
[F] FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS. See Section
902.1.
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. See Section 2602.1.
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING. See Section
1002.1.
FOOD COURT. See Section 402.2.
FOUNDATION PIER. See Section 2102.1.
FRAME STRUCTURE. See Section 1614.2.
[F] GAS CABINET. See Section 415.2.
[F] GAS ROOM. See Section 415.2.
[F] GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM. See Section 421.2.
GLASS FIBERBOARD. See Section 721.1.1.
GLUED BUILT-UP MEMBER. See Section 2302.1.
GRADE FLOOR OPENING. A window or other opening
located such that the sill height of the opening is not more than
44 inches (1118 mm) above or below the finished ground level
adjacent to the opening.
GRADE (LUMBER). See Section 2302.1.
GRADE PLANE. See Section 502.1.
GRANDSTAND. See Section 1002.1.
GRIDIRON. See Section 410.2.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA. See Section 402.2.
GROUTED MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Grouted hollow-unit masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Grouted multiwythe masonry. See Section 2102.1.
GUARD. See Section 1002.1.
GYPSUM BOARD. See Section 2502.1.
GYPSUM PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER. See Section 2502.1.
HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleep-
ing, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls,
storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered
habitable spaces.

15

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

➡

➡

[F] HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS. See
Section 902.1.
[F] HANDLING. See Section 307.2.
HANDRAIL. See Section 1002.1.
HARDBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
[F] HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. See Section 307.2.
[F] HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION MATERIAL (HPM).
See Section 415.2.
HEAD JOINT. See Section 2102.1.
[F] HEALTH HAZARD. See Section 307.2.
HEIGHT, BUILDING. See Section 502.1.
HEIGHT, WALLS. See Section 2102.1.
HELICAL PILE. See Section 1802.1.
HELIPORT. See Section 412.2.
HELISTOP. See Section 412.2.
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor
located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access.
[F] HIGHLY TOXIC. See Section 307.2.
HISTORIC BUILDINGS. Buildings that are listed in or eligi-
ble for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or
designated as historic under an appropriate state or local law
(see Sections 3409 and 3411.9).
HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY. See Section 702.1.
HOSPITALS AND MENTAL HOSPITALS. See Section
308.3.1.
HOUSING UNIT. See Section 408.1.1.
[F] HPM FLAMMABLE LIQUID. See Section 415.2.
[F] HPM ROOM. See Section 415.2.
HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS. See Section 1609.2.
[F] HYDROGEN CUTOFF ROOM. See Section 421.2.
[F ] IMMED IATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND
HEALTH (IDLH). See Section 415.2.
IMPACT LOAD. See Section 1602.1.
[F] INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS. See Section 307.2.
[F] INERT GAS. See Section 307.2.
[F] INITIATING DEVICE. See Section 902.1.
INSPECTION CERTIFICATE. See Section 1702.1.
INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE. See
Section 1102.1.
INTERIOR FINISH. See Section 802.1.
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH. See Section 802.1.
[F] INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE. See Section 802.1.
INTERIOR SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH. See Section
802.1.

16

INTERLAYMENT. See Section 1502.1.
INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. See
Section 1702.1.
JOINT. See Section 702.1.
JURISDICTION. The governmental unit that has adopted
this code under due legislative authority.
LABEL. An identification applied on a product by the manu-
facturer that contains the name of the manufacturer, the func-
tion and performance characteristics of the product or material,
and the name and identification of an approved agency and that
indicates that the representative sample of the product or mate-
rial has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency (see
Section 1703.5 and “Inspection certificate,” “Manufacturer’s
designation” and “Mark”).
LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which has
been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a
nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that
ma in ta ins per iod ic inspec tion of the produc tion of the
above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that
the equipment, material or product meets identified standards
or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM. See Section 2602.1.
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. A type of construction
whose vertical and horizontal structural elements are primarily
formed by a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel
framing members.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS.
See Section 2602.1.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS.
See Section 2602.1.
LIMIT STATE. See Section 1602.1.
[F] LIQUID. See Section 415.2.
[F] LIQUID STORAGE ROOM. See Section 415.2.
[F] LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM.
See Section 415.2.
LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included
in a list published by an organization acceptable to the code
official and concerned with evaluation of products or services
that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed
equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and
whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product
or service meets identified standards or has been tested and
found suitable for a specified purpose.
LIVE LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
LIVE LOADS (ROOF). See Section 1602.1.
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD).
See Section 1602.1.
LOAD EFFECTS. See Section 1602.1.
LOAD FACTOR. See Section 1602.1.
LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
LOT. A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a
street or any public place.
[F] LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL). See Section
415.2.
LOWEST FLOOR. See Section 1612.2.
MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. See Section
1702.1.
[F] MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. See Section 902.1.
MANUFACTURER’S DESIGNATION. An identification
applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating that a
product or material complies with a specified standard or set of
rules (see also “Inspection certificate,” “Label” and “Mark”).
MARK. An identification applied on a product by the manu-
facturer indicating the name of the manufacturer and the func-
tion of a product or material (see also “Inspection certificate,”
“Label” and “Manufacturer’s designation”).
MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and
supported by the building and that projects into the public
right-of-way.
MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Ashlar masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Coursed ashlar. See Section 2102.1.
Glass unit masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Plain masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Random ashlar. See Section 2102.1.
Reinforced masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Solid masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Unreinforced (plain) masonry. See Section 2102.1.
MASONRY UNIT. See Section 2102.1.
Clay. See Section 2102.1.
Concrete. See Section 2102.1.
Hollow. See Section 2102.1.
Solid. See Section 2102.1.
MASTIC FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. See Section
1702.1.
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND
MOTION. See Section 1613.2.
MEANS OF EGRESS. See Section 1002.1.
MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES.
See Section 406.3.2.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN. See Section
1502.1.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS. See Section 1613.2.
MEMBRANE-COVERED CABLE STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
MEMBRANE PENETRATION. See Section 702.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

➡

DEFINITIONS

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP. See Section
702.1.
MENTAL HOSPITALS. See Section 308.3.1.
MERCHANDISE PAD. See Section 1002.1.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM). See Section
1402.1.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM) SYSTEM.
See Section 1402.1.
METAL ROOF PANEL. See Section 1502.1.
METAL ROOF SHINGLE. See Section 1502.1.
MEZZANINE. See Section 502.1.
MICROPILE. See Section 1802.1.
MINERAL BOARD. See Section 721.1.1.
MINERAL FIBER. See Section 702.1.
MINERAL WOOL. See Section 702.1.
MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. See Section
1502.1.
MORTAR. See Section 2102.1.
MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING. See Section 2102.1.
MULTILEVEL ASSEMBLY SEATING . See Sec t ion
1102.1.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. See Section
902.1.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. See Section
902.1.
MULTISTORY UNITS. See Section 1102.1.
NAILING, BOUNDARY. See Section 2302.1.
NAILING, EDGE. See Section 2302.1.
NAILING, FIELD. See Section 2302.1.
NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. See Section 2302.1.
Decay resistant. See Section 2302.1.
Termite resistant. See Section 2302.1.
NOMINAL LOADS. See Section 1602.1.
NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER). See Section 2302.1.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. See
Section 3102.2.
[F ] NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRE S SURE
(NTP). See Section 415.2.
NOSING. See Section 1002.1.
NOTIFICATION ZONE. See Section 902.1.
[F] NUISANCE ALARM. See Section 902.1.
NURSING HOMES. See Section 308.3.1.
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY. See Section 1602.1.
OCCUPANT LOAD. See Section 1002.1.
OCCUPIABLE SPACE. A room or enclosed space designed
for human occupancy in which individuals congregate for

17

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:26 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

amusement, educational or similar purposes or in which occu-
pants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means
of egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the
requirements of this code.
OPEN PARKING GARAGE. See Section 406.3.2.
[F] OPEN SYSTEM. See Section 307.2.
[F] OPERATING BUILDING. See Section 307.2.
ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. See Sec-
tion 1908.1.1.
ORD INARY RE INFORCED CONCRETE STRUC-
TURAL WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
ORD INARY STRUCTURAL PLA IN CONCRETE
WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
[F] ORGANIC PEROXIDE. See Section 307.2.
Class I. See Section 307.2.
Class II. See Section 307.2.
Class III. See Section 307.2.
Class IV. See Section 307.2.
Class V. See Section 307.2.
Unclassified detonable. See Section 307.2.
ORTHOGONAL. See Section 1613.2.
OTHER STRUCTURES. See Section 1602.1.
OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property.
[F] OXIDIZER. See Section 307.2.
Class 4. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
[F] OXIDIZING GAS. See Section 307.2.
PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). See Section 1602.1.
PANIC HARDWARE. See Section 1002.1.
PARTICLEBOARD. See Section 2302.1.
PENETRATION FIRESTOP. See Section 702.1.
PENTHOUSE. See Section 1502.1.
PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the
authority having jurisdiction which authorizes performance of
a specified activity.
PERSON. An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its
or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the afore-
said.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. See Section 310.2.
PHOTOLUMINESCENT. See Section 1002.1.
[F] PHYSICAL HAZARD. See Section 307.2.
[ F ] PHY S IOLOG ICAL WARN ING THRE SHOLD
LEVEL. See Section 415.2.

PINRAIL. See Section 410.2.
PLASTIC, APPROVED. See Section 2602.1.
PLASTIC GLAZING. See Section 2602.1.
PLATFORM. See Section 410.2.
POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. See Section 1502.1.
PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST. See Section 2302.1.
PRESTRESSED MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
PRIMARY FUNCTION. See Section 3402.1.
PRIMARY STRUCTURAL FRAME. The primary struc-
tural frame shall include all of the following structural mem-
bers:
1. The columns;
2. Structural members having direct connections to the col-
umns, including girders, beams, trusses and spandrels;
3. Members of the floor construction and roof construction
having direct connections to the columns; and
4. Bracing members that are essential to the vertical stabil-
ity of the primary structural frame under gravity loading
shall be considered part of the primary structural frame
whether or not the bracing member carries gravity loads.
PRISM. See Section 2102.1.
PROSCENIUM WALL. See Section 410.2.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
PUBLIC-USE AREAS. See Section 1102.1.
PUBLIC WAY. See Section 1002.1.
[F] PYROPHORIC. See Section 307.2.
[F] PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION. See Section 307.2.
RAMP. See Section 1002.1.
RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. See Sec-
tion 406.3.2.
[F] RECORD DRAWINGS. See Section 902.1.
REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE FOIL INSULATION.
An insulation material packaged in rolls, that is less than 0.5
inches thick, with at least one exterior low emittance surface
(0.1 or less) and a core material containing voids or cells.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual
who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design
profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the pro-
fessional registration laws of the state or jurisdiction in which
the project is to be constructed.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPON-

SIBLE CHARGE. A registered design professional engaged
by the owner to review and coordinate certain aspects of the
project, as determined by the building official, for compatibil-
ity with the design of the building or structure, including
submittal documents prepared by others, deferred submittal
documents and phased submittal documents.
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACE OF. A building or portion
thereof intended for the performance of religious services.

➡

➡

➡

➡

➡

18

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:27 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an exist-
ing building for the purpose of its maintenance.
REROOFING. See Section 1502.1.
RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR. See Section 412.2.
RESIDENTIAL CARE/ASSISTED LIVING FACILI-
TIES. See Section 310.2.
RESISTANCE FACTOR. See Section 1602.1.
RESTRICTED ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
RETRACTABLE AWNING. See Section 3105.2.
ROOF ASSEMBLY. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF COVERING. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF COVERING SYSTEM. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF DECK. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF RECOVER. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF REPAIR. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF REPLACEMENT. See Section 1502.1.
ROOF VENTILATION. See Section 1502.1.
ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. See Section 1502.1.
RUBBLE MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Coursed rubble. See Section 2102.1.
Random rubble. See Section 2102.1.
Rough or ordinary rubble. See Section 2102.1.
RUNNING BOND. See Section 2102.1.
SALLYPORT. See Section 408.1.1.
SCISSOR STAIR. See Section 1002.1.
SCUPPER. See Section 1502.1.
SECONDARY MEMBERS. The following structural mem-
bers shall be considered secondary members and not part of the
primary structural frame:
1. Structural members not having direct connections to the
columns;
2. Members of the floor construction not having direct con-
nections to the columns; and
3. Bracing members other than those that are part of the pri-
mary structural frame.

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY. See Section 1613.2.
SEISMIC-FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. See Section
1613.2.
SELF-CLOSING. See Section 702.1.
SELF-LUMINOUS. See Section 1002.1.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. See Sec t ion
1102.1.
[F] SERVICE CORRIDOR. See Section 415.2.
SERVICE ENTRANCE. See Section 1102.1.
SHAFT. See Section 702.1.
SHAFT ENCLOSURE. See Section 702.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

DEFINITIONS

SHALLOW FOUNDATION. See Section 1802.1.
SHEAR WALL. See Sections 2102.1 and 2302.1.
Detailed plain masonry shear wall. See Section 2102.1.
Intermediate prestressed masonry shear wall. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
Intermediate reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Ordinary plain masonry shear wall. See Section 2102.1.
Ordinary plain prestressed masonry shear wall. See Sec-
tion 2102.1.
Ordinary reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Perforated shear wall. See Section 2302.1.
Perforated shear wall segment. See Section 2302.1.
Special prestressed masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
Special reinforced masonry shear wall. See Section
2102.1.
SHELL. See Section 2102.1.
SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. See Section 1502.1.
[F] SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. See Section
902.1.
SITE. See Section 1102.1.
SITE CLASS. See Section 1613.2.
SITE COEFFICIENTS. See Section 1613.2.
SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM. See Section
802.1.
SKYLIGHT, UNIT. A factory-assembled, glazed fenestration
unit, containing one panel of glazing material that allows for
natural lighting through an opening in the roof assembly while
preserving the weather-resistant barrier of the roof.
SKYLIGHTS AND SLOPED GLAZING. Glass or other
transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a
slope of 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or more from vertical. Glazing
material in skylights, including unit skylights, solariums,
sunrooms, roofs and sloped walls, are included in this defini-
tion.
SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep,
which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating,
and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such
rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not
sleeping units.
[F] SMOKE ALARM. See Section 902.1.
SMOKE BARRIER. See Section 702.1.
SMOKE COMPARTMENT. See Section 702.1.
SMOKE DAMPER. See Section 702.1.
[F] SMOKE DETECTOR. See Section 902.1.
SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. See Section 802.1.

19

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:27 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY SEATING. See Sec-
tion 1002.1.
SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE. See Section 902.1.
[F] SOLID. See Section 415.2.
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING. See Section 411.2.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 1612.2.
SPECIAL INSPECTION. See Section 1702.1.
SPECIAL INSPECTION, CONTINUOUS. See Section
1702.1.
SPECIAL INSPECTION, PERIODIC. See Section 1702.1.
SPECIAL STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1908.1.1.
SPECIFIED. See Section 2102.1.
S P E C I F I E D C O M P R E S S I V E S T R E N G T H O F
MASONRY (f ¢m). See Section 2102.1.
SPLICE. See Section 702.1.
SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. See Section
1702.1.
STACK BOND. See Section 2102.1.
STAGE. See Section 410.2.
STAIR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, EXTERIOR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, INTERIOR. See Section 1002.1.
STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. See Section 1002.1.
[F] STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. See Section
902.1.
Class I system. See Section 902.1.
Class II system. See Section 902.1.
Class III system. See Section 902.1.
[F] STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. See Section 902.1.
Automatic dry. See Section 902.1.
Automatic wet. See Section 902.1.
Manual dry. See Section 902.1.
Manual wet. See Section 902.1.
Semiautomatic dry. See Section 902.1.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. See Section 1612.2.
STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED. See Section
2202.1.
STEEL JOIST. See Section 2202.1.
STEEL MEMBER, STRUCTURAL. See Section 2202.1.
STEEP SLOPE. A roof slope greater than two units vertical in
12 units horizontal (17-percent slope).
STONE MASONRY. See Section 2102.1.
Ashlar stone masonry. See Section 2102.1.
Rubble stone masonry. See Section 2102.1.

20

[F] STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. See Section
415.2.
STORM SHELTER. See Section 423.2.
Community storm shelter. See Section 423.2.
Residential storm shelter. See Section 423.2.
STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper
surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next
above (also see “Basement,” “Mezzanine” and Section 502.1).
It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the
topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the
ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the
roof rafters.
STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its fin-
ished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the
finished surface of the floor next above is:
1. More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade plane; or
2. More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground
level at any point.
STRENGTH. See Section 2102.1.
Design strength. See Section 2102.1.
Nominal strength. See Sections 1602.1 and 2102.1.
Required strength. See Sections 1602.1 and 2102.1.
STRENGTH DESIGN. See Section 1602.1.
STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER. See Section
2302.1.
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL). See Section 2302.1.
Parallel strand lumber (PSL). See Section 2302.1.
STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED TIMBER. See
Section 2302.1.
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. See Section 1702.1.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.
SUBDIAPHRAGM. See Section 2302.1.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. See Section 1612.2.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. See Section 1612.2.
SUBSTANTIAL STRUCTURAL DAMAGE. See Section
3402.1.
SUITE. See Section 1002.1.
SUNROOM. See Section 1202.1.
[F] SUPERVISING STATION. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SERVICE. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE. See
Section 902.1.
SWIMMING POOLS. See Section 3109.2.
T RATING. See Section 702.1.
TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE. See Section 3402.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TENT. A structure, enclosure or shelter, with or without side-
walls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material sup-
ported in any manner except by air or the contents it protects.
THERMAL ISOLATION. See Section 1202.1.
THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL. See Section 2602.1.
THERMOSETTING MATERIAL. See Section 2602.1.
THIN-BED MORTAR. See Section 2102.1.
THROUGH PENETRATION. See Section 702.1.
THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. See
Section 702.1.
TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN). See Section 2302.1.
TIE, LATERAL. See Section 2102.1.
TIE, WALL. See Section 2102.1.
TILE. See Section 2102.1.
TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY. See Section 2102.1.
[F] TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. See Section 902.1.
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in
a group of three or more attached units in which each unit
extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at
least two sides.
[F] TOXIC. See Section 307.2.
TRANSIENT. See Section 310.2.
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. See Section 412.2.
TREATED WOOD. See Section 2302.1.
Fire-retardant-treated wood. See Section 2302.1.
Preservative-treated wood. See Section 2302.1.
TRIM. See Section 802.1.
[F] TROUBLE SIGNAL. See Section 902.1.
TYPE A UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
TYPE B UNIT. See Section 1102.1.
UNDERLAYMENT. See Section 1502.1.
[F] UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL. See Section
307.2.
Class 4. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
[F] USE (MATERIAL). See Section 415.2.
VAPOR-PERMEABLE MEMBRANE. A material or cover-
ing having a permeance rating of 5 perms (52.9 ´10-10 kg/Pa × s × m2)
or greater, when tested in accordance with the dessicant method
using Procedure A of ASTM E 96. A vapor-permeable material
permits the passage of moisture vapor.
VAPOR RETARDER CLASS. A measure of a material or
assembly’s ability to limit the amount of moisture that passes

DEFINITIONS

through that material or assembly. Vapor retarder class shall be
defined using the desiccant method of ASTM E 96 as follows:
Class I: 0.1 perm or less.
Class II: 0.1 < perm £ 1.0 perm.
Class III: 1.0 < perm £ 10 perm.
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEM. See Section 1602.1.
VEHICULAR GATE. See Section 3110.2.
VENEER. See Section 1402.1.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of sup-
plying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such
air from, any space.
VINYL SIDING. See Section 1402.1.
[F] VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.
See Section 902.1.
WALKWAY, PEDESTRIAN. A walkway used exclusively as
a pedestrian trafficway.
WALL. See Section 2102.1.
Cavity wall. See Section 2102.1.
Composite wall. See Section 2102.1.
Dry-stacked, surface-bonded wall. See Section 2102.1.
Masonry-bonded hollow wall. See Section 2102.1.
Parapet wall. See Section 2102.1.
WALL, LOAD-BEARING. Any wall meeting either of the
following classifications:
1. Any metal or wood stud wall that supports more than 100
pounds per linear foot (1459 N/m) of vertical load in
addition to its own weight.
2. Any masonry or concrete wall that supports more than
200 pounds per linear foot (2919 N/m) of vertical load in
addition to its own weight.
WALL, NONLOAD-BEARING. Any wall that is not a load-
bearing wall.
WALL PIER. See Section 1908.1.1.
[F] WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL. See Section 307.2.
Class 3. See Section 307.2.
Class 2. See Section 307.2.
Class 1. See Section 307.2.
WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. See Section 1402.1.
WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES. See Section 2502.1.
WEB. See Section 2102.1.
[F] WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. See
Section 902.1.
WHEELCHAIR SPACE. See Section 1102.1.
WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION. See Section 1609.2.
WINDER. See Section 1002.1.
WIRE BACKING. See Section 2502.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DEFINITIONS

[F] WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. See Section
902.1.
WOOD SHEAR PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. See Section 2302.1.
Composite panels. See Section 2302.1.
Oriented strand board (OSB). See Section 2302.1.
Plywood. See Section 2302.1.
[F] WORKSTATION. See Section 415.2.
WYTHE. See Section 2102.1.
YARD. An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from
the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by
this code, on the lot on which a building is situated.
[F] ZONE. See Section 902.1.
ZONE, NOTIFICATION. See Section 902.1.

22

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

02_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:10:28 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 3

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

SECTION 301
GENERAL

301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
classification of all buildings and structures as to use and occu-
pancy.

SECTION 302
CLASSIFICATION

302.1 General. Structures or portions of structures shall be
classified with respect to occupancy in one or more of the
groups listed below. A room or space that is intended to be
occupied at different times for different purposes shall comply
with all of the requirements that are applicable to each of the
purposes for which the room or space will be occupied. Struc-
tures with multiple occupancies or uses shall comply with Sec-
tion 508. Where a structure is proposed for a purpose that is not
specifically provided for in this code, such structure shall be
classified in the group that the occupancy most nearly resem-
bles, according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved.
1. Assembly (see Section 303): Groups A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4 and A-5
2. Business (see Section 304): Group B
3. Educational (see Section 305): Group E
4. Factory and Industrial (see Section 306): Groups F-1
and F-2
5. High Hazard (see Section 307): Groups H-1, H-2, H-3,
H-4 and H-5
6. Institutional (see Section 308): Groups I-1, I-2, I-3 and
I-4
7. Mercantile (see Section 309): Group M
8. Residential (see Section 310): Groups R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4
9. Storage (see Section 311): Groups S-1 and S-2
10. Utility and Miscellaneous (see Section 312): Group U

SECTION 303
ASSEMBLY GROUP A

303.1 Assembly Group A. Assembly Group A occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for the gathering of persons for purposes such
as civic, social or religious functions; recreation, food or drink
consumption or awaiting transportation.
Exceptions:
1. A building or tenant space used for assembly pur-
poses with an occupant load of less than 50 persons
shall be classified as a Group B occupancy.

2. A room or space used for assembly purposes with an
occupant load of less than 50 persons and accessory
to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B
occupancy or as part of that occupancy.
3. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is
less than 750 square feet (70 m2) in area and accessory
to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B
occupancy or as part of that occupancy.
4. Assembly areas that are accessory to Group E occu-
pancies are not considered separate occupancies
except when applying the assembly occupancy
requirements of Chapter 11.
5. Accessory religious educational rooms and religious
auditoriums with occupant loads of less than 100 are
not considered separate occupancies.

Assembly occupancies shall include the following:

A-1 Assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for
the production and viewing of the performing arts or
motion pictures including, but not limited to:
Motion picture theaters
Symphony and concert halls
Television and radio studios admitting an audience
Theaters

A-2 Assembly uses intended for food and/or drink con-
sumption including, but not limited to:
Banquet halls
Night clubs
Restaurants
Taverns and bars

A-3 Assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or
amusement and other assembly uses not classified else-
where in Group A including, but not limited to:
Amusement arcades
Art galleries
Bowling alleys
Community halls
Courtrooms
Dance halls (not including food or drink consump-
tion)
Exhibition halls
Funeral parlors
Gymnasiums (without spectator seating)
Indoor swimming pools (without spectator seating)
Indoor tennis courts (without spectator seating)
Lecture halls
Libraries
Museums
Places of religious worship
Pool and billiard parlors
Waiting areas in transportation terminals

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

A-4 Assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting
events and activities with spectator seating including,
but not limited to:
Arenas
Skating rinks
Swimming pools
Tennis courts
A-5 Assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing
outdoor activities including, but not limited to:
Amusement park structures
Bleachers
Grandstands
Stadiums

SECTION 304
BUSINESS GROUP B

304.1 Business Group B. Business Group B occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for office, professional or service-type transac-
tions, including storage of records and accounts. Business
occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Airport traffic control towers
Ambulatory health care facilities
Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds
Banks
Barber and beauty shops
Car wash
Civic administration
Clinic—outpatient
Dry cleaning and laundries: pick-up and delivery stations
and self-service
Educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade
Electronic data processing
Laboratories: testing and research
Motor vehicle showrooms
Post offices
Print shops
Professional services (architects, attorneys, dentists, physi-
cians, engineers, etc.)
Radio and television stations
Telephone exchanges
Training and skill development not within a school or aca-
demic program
304.1.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. Buildings or portions thereof
used to provide medical care on less than a 24-hour basis to
individuals who are not rendered incapable of self-preserva-
tion by the services provided.

SECTION 305
EDUCATIONAL GROUP E

305.1 Educational Group E. Educational Group E occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a

portion thereof, by six or more persons at any one time for
educational purposes through the 12th grade. Religious educa-
tional rooms and religious auditoriums, which are accessory to
places of religious worship in accordance with Section 303.1
and have occupant loads of less than 100, shall be classified as
A-3 occupancies.
305.2 Day care. The use of a building or structure, or portion
thereof, for educational, supervision or personal care services
for more than five children older than 21/2 years of age, shall be
classified as a Group E occupancy.

SECTION 306
FACTORY GROUP F
306.1 Factory Industrial Group F. Factory Industrial Group
F occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or
structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling,
fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or pro-
cessing operations that are not classified as a Group H hazard-
ous or Group S storage occupancy.
306.2 Factory Industrial F-1 Moderate-hazard Occupancy.
Factory industrial uses which are not classified as Factory
Industrial F-2 Low Hazard shall be classified as F-1 Moderate
Hazard and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Aircraft (manufacturing, not to include repair)
Appliances
Athletic equipment
Automobiles and other motor vehicles
Bakeries
Beverages: over 16-percent alcohol content
Bicycles
Boats
Brooms or brushes
Business machines
Cameras and photo equipment
Canvas or similar fabric
Carpets and rugs (includes cleaning)
Clothing
Construction and agricultural machinery
Disinfectants
Dry cleaning and dyeing
Electric generation plants
Electronics
Engines (including rebuilding)
Food processing
Furniture
Hemp products
Jute products
Laundries
Leather products
Machinery
Metals
Millwork (sash and door)
Motion pictures and television filming (without spectators)
Musical instruments
Optical goods
Paper mills or products
Photographic film

24

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Plastic products
Printing or publishing
Recreational vehicles
Refuse incineration
Shoes
Soaps and detergents
Textiles
Tobacco
Trailers
Upholstering
Wood; distillation
Woodworking (cabinet)
306.3 Factory Industrial F-2 Low-hazard Occupancy. Fac-
tory industrial uses that involve the fabrication or manufactur-
ing of noncombustible materials which during finishing,
packing or processing do not involve a significant fire hazard
shall be classified as F-2 occupancies and shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
Beverages: up to and including 16-percent alcohol content
Brick and masonry
Ceramic products
Foundries
Glass products
Gypsum
Ice
Metal products (fabrication and assembly)

SECTION 307
HIGH-HAZARD GROUP H
[F] 307.1 High-hazard Group H. High-hazard Group H occu-
pancy includes, among others, the use of a building or struc-
ture, or a portion thereof, that involves the manufacturing,
processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a
physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those
allowed in control areas complying with Section 414, based on
the maximum allowable quantity limits for control areas set
forth in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Hazardous occupancies
are classified in Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 and shall
be in accordance with this section, the requirements of Section
415 and the International Fire Code. Hazardous materials
stored, or used on top of roofs or canopies shall be classified as
outdoor storage or use and shall comply with the International
Fire Code.
Exceptions: The following shall not be classified as Group
H, but shall be classified as the occupancy that they most
nearly resemble.
1. Buildings and structures occupied for the applica-
tion of flammable finishes, provided that such build-

➡

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

ings or areas conform to the requirements of Section
416 and the International Fire Code.
2. Wholesale and retail sales and storage of flammable
and combustible liquids in mercantile occupancies
conforming to the International Fire Code.
3. Closed piping system containing flammable or
combustible liquids or gases utilized for the opera-
tion of machinery or equipment.
4. Cleaning establishments that utilize combustible
liquid solvents having a flash point of 140°F (60°C)
or higher in closed systems employing equipment
listed by an approved testing agency, provided that
this occupancy is separated from all other areas of
the building by 1-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
712, or both.
5. Cleaning establishments that utilize a liquid solvent
having a flash point at or above 200°F (93°C).
6. Liquor stores and distributors without bulk storage.
7. Refrigeration systems.
8. The storage or utilization of materials for agricul-
tural purposes on the premises.
9. Stationary batteries utilized for facility emergency
power, uninterrupted power supply or telecommu-
nication facilities, provided that the batteries are
provided with safety venting caps and ventilation is
provided in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code.
10. Corrosives shall not include personal or household
products in their original packaging used in retail
display or commonly used building materials.
11. Buildings and structures occupied for aerosol stor-
age shall be classified as Group S-1, provided that
such buildings conform to the requirements of the
International Fire Code.
12. Display and storage of nonflammable solid and non-
flammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous
materials in quantities not exceeding the maximum
allowable quantity per control area in Group M or S
occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5.
13. The storage of black powder, smokeless propellant
and small arms primers in Groups M and R-3 and
special industrial explosive devices in Groups B, F,
M and S, provided such storage conforms to the
quantity limits and requirements prescribed in the
International Fire Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

25

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:13 AM

3

26

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

[

A
E
H
L
B
F
A
O
A
F
E
R
A

]

T

1
7
0
Z
3

.

(

1

)

M

X
A

I

M

U

M

A

L
L

O

W

B
A

E
L

N
A
U
Q

N
O
C
R
E
P
Y
T
T

I

T

O
R

L

S
U
O
D
R
A

M

A

A
R
E
T

I

P
S
L

O

A
C
S
Y
H
P
A
G
N
S

I

I

L

A
H

Z

D
R
A

a

,

,
j

m

,

n

,

p

M

A

A
R
E
T

I

L

C

L

S
S
A

N
E
S
E
U
D
L
H
Y
E
B
T
D
X
A
E
A
T
P
E
U
M
O
N
C
O
A
L
X
E
L
U
R
H
E
A
Q
G

W

T

I

M

M

W

I

I

T
S

G
A
R
O

E

b

C
E
S
U

-

L

O

E
T
S
Y
S
D
E
S

M

S

b

E
S
U

-

O

E
T
S
Y
S
N
E
P

M

S

b

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
c
a
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
c
a
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

C

o

m

u
b

s

i
t

b

l

e

i
l

u
q

i

d

c

,

i

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

A
B

H
H

-
-

o
o
2
2

r
r
/

H
H
A
N

-
-

3
3

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
2
2
3
1
3
3
1

d

,

e

d

,

e

,

e

,

f

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
2
2
3
1
3
3
1

d

d

,

f

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
0
0
3
3
8
3

d

d

,

f

C

o

m

u
b

s

i
t

b

l

e

i
f

b

e

r

L

d
o
o

e
s
e

B

a

l

o

H

-

3

(
(

0
0
0
0
0
1
1

)
)

,

A
N

/

A
N

/

(
(

0
0
0
0
0
1
1

)
)

,

A
N

/

A
N

/

(
(

0
0
0
2
2

)
)

A
N

/

C
C

n
o

s
s
s
a

u

m

e

r

r
i
f

e

w

k
n
o
o

r

s

(

l

C

,

C

o

m
m

)

4
1

.

G

H

-

3

5
2
1

d

,

e

,

l

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

l
f

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

A
N

/

H

-

2

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
1

d

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

i

n

e

t
r

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

N

L

A
N

/

A
N

/

N

L

A
N

/

A
N

/

C

r

g
o
y

e

n

i

s
c

,

x
o

i

d

i

z

i

g
n

A
N

/

H

-

3

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
4

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
1

d

E

p
x

l

o

s

i

v

s
e

D
D
D
D
D
D
D

i
i
i
i
i
i
i

v
v
v
v
v
v
v

i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i

s
s
s
s
s
s
s

1
2
3
4
5
6
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

G

H
H

r
-
-
-
-
-
-

1
1
3
3
1
1
o
1

H

-

H

-

2

H
H
H
H

0
5
1
1
5
1
5
2
1
1

e

,

g

e

,

g

e

,

g

e

,

g

d

,

e

,

l

e

,

g

d

,

e

,

g

(
(
(
(

0
1
1
5
5

e
e
e
e
)
e
/
/
)
)
)
)

,

g

,

g

,

g

,

g

A
N

(

1

,

g

A
N

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
0
2
2
1
5
0
0

.
.

g

g

g

g

A
N

/

5
2
0

.

g

A
N

/

(
(

5
5
0
2
2
1
5
0
0

.
.

g
g
)
)
g
g
)
)

(
(

A
N

/

(

5
2
0

.

g
)

A
N

/

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
2
2
1
0
0

.
.

g

g

g

A
A
N
N

/
/

5
2
0

.

g

A
N

/

(
(

5
5
2
2
1
0
0

.
.

g
g
)
)
g
)
/
/

(

A
A
N
N

(

5
2
0

.

g
)

A
N

/

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

g

s
a

G

e
e
s
a

d
u
o

s
e

L

i

u
q

i
f

H

-

2

A
N

/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
0
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
0
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

A
N

/

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

i
l

u
q

i

d

c

1
d
n
1

A

1

B

a

C

H
H

-

3
2

o

r

-

A
N

/

0
0
2
3
1

d

,

e

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
2
3
1

d

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
0
1
3

d

d

F

l

a

m
m
m

a
a

n
o
b

l
i
t

e

(
i
l

u
1
q

i

1
d

,
,

c

o

b

i

n

A

B

,

1

C

)

A
N

/

H
H

-

3
2

o

r

-

A
N

/

0
2
1

d

,

e

,

h

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
2
1

d

,

h

A
N

/

A
N

/

0
3

d

,

h

F

l

a

m
m

a

b

l

e

s

o

i
l

d

A
N

/

H

-

3

5
2
1

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
2
1

d

A
N

/

A
N

/

5
2

d

A
N

/

I

n

e

t
r

g

s
a

G

e
e
s
a

d
u
o

s
e

L

i

u
q

i
f

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

N
N

L
L

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

N
N

L
L

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

O

r

g

a

n

i

c

p

e

r

x
o

i

d

e

D
U

I
I
I
I
I
I
I

VV

A
A
H
H
H
H
N
N

-
-
-
-
/
/

1
2
3
3

5
0
1
5
2
5
1

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

d

,

e

N
N

L
L

(
(
(
(

5
0
1
5
2
5
1

d
d
)
e
d
)
)
)

,

g

,

e

,

e

,

e

N
N

L
L

A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/

5
5
0
2
1
2
5
1
0

.

g

d

d

d

N
N

L
L

(

5
5
0
2
1
2
5
1
0

.

g
d
)
d
)
)
)

(
(
(

N
N

L
L

A
A
A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/
/
/

5
0
5
2
1
1
2
0

.

g

d

d

d

N
N

L
L

(

5
0
5
2
1
1
2
0

.

g
)
d
d
d
)
)
)

(
(
(

N
N

L
L

O

x

i

d

i

e
z

r

k 21
43

H

r
-
-
/

1
3
o
2

H

-

H

-

3

A
H
N

0
0
0
0
1
5
0
1
2
4

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

,

e

,

f

(
(
(
(

0
0
0
0
1
5
0
1
2
4

e
d
)
d
)
e
)
)

,

g

,

e

,

e

,

,

f

A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/

0
5
0
0
2
2
5
0
0
2
4

.

g

d

d

,

f

(

0
5
0
0
2
2
5
0
0
2
4

.

g
)
d
)

(

(
(

)
d
)

,

f

A
A
A
A
N
N
N
N

/
/
/
/

0
5
0
2
0
2
0
5
0
1

.

g

d

d

,

f

(

0
5
0
2
0
2
0
5
0
1

.

g
)
d
d
)
)

(
(

(

,

)

f

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

4

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:14 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

27

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

[

T
L
F

]

O
E
A
L
E
B
R
A
A

1
7
F
0
3

.

(

Z
1

)

—

n
o
c

i
t

A
R
E
T
d
e
u
S
n
U
O
D
R
A

M

X
A

I

M

U

M

A

L
L

O

W

B
A

E
L

N
A
U
Q

N
O
C
R
E
P
Y
T
T

I

T

O
R

A
H

M

A

I

P
S
L

O

A
C
S
Y
H
P
A
G
N
S

I

I

L

A
H

Z

D
R
A

a

,

,
j

m

,

n

,

p

M

A

A
R
E
T

I

L

C

L

S
S
A

N
E
S
E
U
D
L
H
Y
E
B
T
D
X
A
E
A
T
P
E
U
M
O
N
C
O
A
L
X
E
L
U
R
H
E
A
Q
G

W

T

I

M

M

W

I

I

T
S

G
A
R
O

E

b

C
E
S
U

-

L

O

E
T
S
Y
S
D
E
S

M

S

b

E
S
U

-

O

E
T
S
Y
S
N
E
P

M

S

b

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
a
c
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

G

e
e
P
s
T
c
a
b
u
a
c

(

i

f

t

t

N

)

s
d
n
e
u
e
o
p
c
b
d
u
o
c
S

i
l

(

i

f

)
t

s
n
o
s
d
a
n
g
u
d
o
p
u
q
L

i

i

l
l

(

)

O

x

i

d

i

z

i

g
g
n

s
a

G

e
e
s
a

d
u
o

s
e

L

i

u
q

i
f

H

-

3

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
5
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
N

d
)
/

(

0
5
1

,

e

0
0
5
1

,

d

,

e

A
N

/

A
A
N
N

/
/

A
A
N
N

/
/

P

y

r

o
h
p
o

i
r

c

m

a

t

e

i
r

a

l

A
N

/

H

-

2

4

e

,

g

(

4

e
)

,

g

0
5

e

,

g

1

g

(

1

g
)

0
1

g

0

0

U

n

s

t

a

b

l

e

r
(

c
a
e

i
t

v

e

)

4321

H

r
-
-

1
3
o
1

H

-

H

-

2

H

A
N

/

0
1
5
5

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

N

L

(
(
(

0
1
5
5

d
e
d
)
)
)

,

g

,

e

,

e

N

L

0
0
0
1
5
5
2

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

N

L

5
0
2
1
5
0

.

g

d

d

N

L

(

5
0
2
1
5
0

.

g
)
d
d
)
)

(
(

N

L

0
0
2
5
1
2

e

,

g

d

,

e

d

,

e

N

L

5
0
2
1
1
0

.

g

d

d

N

L

(

5
0
2
1
1
0

.

g
)
d
d
)
)

(
(

N

L

W

a

t

e

r

r

c
a
e

i
t

v

e

321

A
H
H
N

-
-
/

2
3

0
5
5

d

,

e

d

,

e

N

L

(
(

0
5
5

d
d
)
)

,

e

,

e

N

L

A
A
A
N
N
N

/
/
/

0
5
5

d

d

N

L

(
(

0
5
5

d
d
)
)

N

L

A
A
A
N
N
N

/
/
/

0
1
1

d

d

N

L

(
(

0
1
1

d
d
)
)

N

L

o
F

r

S

:
I

b
u
c
1

i

c

f

o
o

t

=

8
2
0
0

.

m

3

,

d
n
u
o
p
1

=

g
k
4
5
4
0

.

,

a
g
1

l
l

n
o

=

5
8
7
3

.

L

.

N

=
L

N

o

t

L

i

m

t
i

d
e

;

A
N

/

=

N

o

t

A

p
p

i
l

b
a
c

l

e

;

D
U

=

U

c
n

l

s
s
a

i
f
i

d
e

D

e

t

b
a
n
o

l

e

a

.

o
F

r

u

o
e
s

f

n
o
c

t

r

o

l

a

a
e
r

s

,

e
e
s

S

c
e

i
t

2
4
1
4
n
o

.

.

b

.

T

e
h

g
g
a

r

a
g
e

t

n
a
u
q
e

t
i
t

y

i

u
n

e
s

d
n
a

s

t

o

r

e
g
a

s

a
h

l
l

o
n

t

d
e
e
c
x
e

t

n
a
u
q
e
h

t
i
t

y

i
l

s

t

d
e

f

o

r

s

t

o

r

e
g
a

.

c

.

T

c
n
a
n
a
u
a
p
q
g
u
e
n
c
h
c
e
o
b

,
i
t
i
i
t

o
h
n
o
a
h
c
a
u
s
a
q
e
e
o
h
b
s
a
e
s
e

f

l

i
l
i
t
i
l
t
l

d
u
d
n
e
a
s
d
d
o
a
v
o
t
o
f
e
r
r
s
p
n
e
n
d
s
e
e
c
g
d
a
e
e
v
e
e
b
o
b
s
c
o
e
n

r

i

l
i

w

l
i
i
s
r
r
e
o
e
a
e
a
s
e
u
a
h
s
c
s
n
e
u
o
s
o
c
h
a
s
h
f
f
t

l

l

l
r
t

c
a
d
u
h
e
d
g
s
o
a
s
r
k
e
p
c
c
a
a
n
p
i
a
r
p
t
e
s
u
r
u
a
c
d
c
n
o
a

i
l

i
l
t
l

a
u
u
d
o
v
v
d
y
b
n
n
n
e
s
n
d
c
o
e
e
g
p
a
a
k
0
g
5
c
3
a
n
p
1
a
h
e
g
n
a
e
r
i
s
d
o
d
e
e
u
c
q
o
x
n
e
e
g
h
o
n
n
g
n
s
n
i
r
a
e
d
n
n
v
o
a
o
c
n
r
s
p
o
c
c
d
e
e
a
u
d
o
c
v
e
b
d
d
n
n
o
a
n
n

t

i
l

m
m

t
i

i

i
t

t
i

i
l

i

t
r

i

i
t

i

i

l

n
o
o
c
e

t
f

e
e
n
a
a

i

s
-
r
r

o
n

t
i

a
h
g
3
1
d
g
n
u
q
d
e
e
e
c
b
x
e
c
s

i

.

l
t
l

e
s
r
n
e
o
h

.

I

s
o
e
n
a
s
s
n
e
o
a
s
u
e
o
o
s
h
e
h
d
n
o
a
e
a
d
n
e
a
n

i
r

t

r
l
i

w

l
l

l
i
t

l

t

f

m
m

t
i
i

i

,

t

t
,

m
m

s

,

s

i
t
l

t

m

r

l

m

w

t

m

i

l

i
l

i

s

w

t
i

m

t
f

t

i

l
f

m
m

l

,

t

i
l

,

i

s

i

i

i

t

i

t

.

l
l

.

d

.

M

o
a
h
a
s
s
e
u
o
n
x
h
a
o
b

i

m

m

l
l

w

b
e
a
b

l

u
a
h
s
u
s
c
e
c
a
d
n
e
a
u
p
q
p
e
a

i
t
i
t

l
l
l

e
p
0
0
1
d
e
s
a
e
y
c
n
e
v
e
b
a

i

r

r

n
e
c

t

i

u
b
n

l
i

d

i

g
n

u
q
e
s

i

d
e
p
p

t

h

r

u
o
h
g
u
o

t

w

t
i

u
a
n
a
h

t

o

m

a

i
t

s
c

p

r

i

k
n

l

s
y
s
r
e

t

e

m

i

o
c
c
a
n

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

1
1
3
3
0
9
n
o

.

.

.

.

W

e
h

r

e

N

o

t

a
e
e

l

s

p
p
a
o

i
l

s
e

,

t

e
h

i

c
n

r

e
s
a
e

f

o

r

t

t

l
l

i
l

m

i
t

l

.

e

.

M

a
o
0
u
1
9
x
3
a
0
7
2

.
i

m

m

t
l
l
f

b
n
a
e
h
o

w

l
t

r
e
e

s
e
a
n
o
n
a
a
u
q
n

l
i
t
i
t

a
e
h
r
s

l
l

c
n
e
e
d
b
o

.
i

r

d
e
e
s
r
a
e
e
h

n
s
e
e
h
p
p
a
n
e
o
c
s
r
l
e
a
p
d
0
e
0
o
1

t

w

s

t
t

d
o
e
b
v
o
o
p
e
p
s
a
a
n
e
c
d
n
e
e
o
h

i
r

r
i

r
f

s

t

e
s
g
e
a
o
o
n
h

r

b
a
a
h
c
s

l
i
l

e
y
n
e
b
v
a
c
a
s
u
a
g
u
s
c
e
c
x
a
o
d
b
e
y
a
p
d
p
a
s
e
e
b
n

t

,

,

i

t
.

s

o

r

u
a
h
x
e

s

t

d
e

c
n
e

l

o

s

u

r

s
e

o

r

i

n

i
l

s

t

d
e

a
s

f

e

t

y

n
a
c

s

i

n

o
c
c
a

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

h

S

c
e

i
t

n
o

.

I

i
t

F

i

C

W

N

t

i
l

,

r

t

t

i
l

m

l

i
t

l

f

.

T

e
p
e
h

r

m

t
t
i

n
a
u
q
d
e

i
t
i
t

s
e

s

a
h

l
l

o
n

t

e
b

i
l

m

t
i

d
e

i

u
b
a
n

l
i

d

i

u
q
e
g
n

i

d
e
p
p

t

h

r

u
o
h
g
u
o

t

w

t
i

u
a
n
a
h

t

o

m

a

i
t

c

s

p

r

i

k
n

l

r
e

s
y
s

t

e

m

i

o
c
c
a
n

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

1
1
3
3
0
9
n
o

.

.

.

.

g

.

P

e

r

m

t
t
i

n
o
d
e

l

y

i

u
b
n

l
i

d

i

g
n

s

u
q
e

i

d
e
p
p

t

h

r

u
o
h
g
u
o

t

w

t
i

u
a
n
a
h

t

o

m

a

i
t

c

s

p

r

i

k
n

l

r
e

s
y
s

t

e

m

i

o
c
c
a
n

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

1
1
3
3
0
9
n
o

.

.

.

.

h

.

C

n
o

t

a

i

n

i

o
n
g
n

t

m

o

r

e

t

n
a
h

t

e
h

m

x
a

i

m

u

m

a

l
l

o

w

b
a

l

n
a
u
q
e

t
i
t

e
p
y

r

n
o
c

t

r

o

l

a

o
a
e
r

f

C

l

s
s
a

I

A

,

I

B

o

r

I

C

l
f

a

m
m

b
a

l

e

i
l

u
q

i

d

s

.

.
i

T

e
h

m

x
a

i

m

u

m

a

l
l

o

w

b
a

l

n
a
u
q
e

t
i
t

y

s

a
h

l
l

o
n

t

p
p
a

l

y

t

o

f

e
u

l

o

l
i

s

t

o

r

e
g
a

o
c

m

p

l

y

i

g
n

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

o
2
3
3
0
6
n
o

.

.

f

t

e
h

I

n

t

r
e

a
n

i
t

a
n
o

l

F

i

e
r

C

e
d
o

.

.
j

Q

n
a
u

i
t
i
t

s
e

i

a
p
n

r

n
e

t

s
e
h

i

s

i

d
n

i

a
c

t

n
a
u
q
e

t
i
t

n
u
y

t
i

s

i

a
p
n

r

n
e

t

s
e
h

i

s

a

t

t

o
d
a
e
h
e
h

f

o
c
h
c
a
e

l

u

m

n

.

k

.

m
A

d
x
n
a
a

i

m

e
u
h

m
m

e
n
n
a
n
u
a
q

t
i
r
t

o
y
o

t
f
s

d
a
n
h
u
o
p
e
g
0
a
0
2
o

s

a
g
0
d
2
e
v
o
o
d
p
o
p
s
a
f
e
o
b

r
i
l

r

l
l

n
o

s

o

f

i
l

u
q

i

d

C

l

s
s
a

x
o
3

i

d

i

e
z

s
r

i

a
s

l
l

o

w

d
e

w

n
e
h

s

h
c
u

m

a

t

e

i
r

a

l

a
s

r

a
s
s
e
c
e
n
e

r

y

f

o

r

m

a

i

n

t

u
p
e
c
n
a
n
e

r

o
p

s
e
s

,

e
p
o

r

a

i
t

o
n
o

n
a
s
r

t
i

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

u
q
e

i

p

m

n
e

.
t

o
S

t

r

n
o
c
e
g
a

t

a

i

n

-

e

s
r

t

f

r

s

l
l

.

.
l

N

a
e
h

l
l
t

w

d
o
e
s
h
u
g
e
e
b

i

t

t
.
f

y
p
e
h

r

o

t

n
h
c
e

i

o
c
c

m

o
p

s

i
t
i

o
n
o

t
f

e
h

r
i
f

e

w

o

r

k

s

.

W

e
h

r

e

t

e
n
e
h

t

w

e

i

h
g

t

o

t
f

y
p
e
h

r

o

t

n
h
c
e

i

o
c
c

m

o
p

s

i
t
i

o
n
o

t
f

e
h

r
i
f

e

w

o

r

k

s

i

s

o
n

t

o
n
k

w

n

,

e
p
5
2

r

n
e
c

t

o

t
f

g
e
h

r

o

s
s

w

e

i

h
g

t

o

t
f

e
h

r
i
f

e

w

o

r

k

s

,

i

c
n

l

d
u

i

g
a
k
c
a
p
g
n

i

g
n

,

s

m

.

o
F

r

a
g

l
l

n
o

s

o

f

i
l

u
q

i

d

s

,

d

i

v

i

e
d

t

e
h

a

m

n
u
o

t

i

d
n
u
o
p
n

s

0
1
y
b

i

o
c
c
a
n

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

o
2
1
3
0
7
2
n
o

.

.

f

t

e
h

I

n

t

r
e

a
n

i
t

a
n
o

l

F

i

e
r

C

e
d
o

.

n

.

o
F

r

s

t

o

r

e
g
a

d
d
n
a

i

s

p

l

n
a
u
q
y
a

i
t
i
t

s
e

i

n

G

r

p
u
o

M

d
n
a

s

t

o

r

n
a
u
q
e
g
a

i
t
i
t

s
e

i

n

G

r

c
n
a
p
u
c
c
o
S
p
u
o

i

s
e

o
c

m

p

l

y

i

g
n

w

t
i

S
h

c
e

i
t

5
2
4
1
4
n
o

.

.

,

e
e
s

T

b
a

l

s
e

5
2
4
1
4

.

.

(

1

)

5
2
4
1
4
d
n
a

.

.

(

2

)

.

o

.

D

n
e

e
s

l

a
b
d
e
k
c
a
p
y

l

o
c
d
e

t
t

n
o

t

a
h

t

o
c

m

p

i
l

s
e

w

t
i

h

t

k
c
a
p
e
h

i

g
n

r

u
q
e

r
i

e

m

n
e

t

s

o

f

I

S

O

5
1
1
8

s

a
h

l
l

o
n

t

e
b

i

c
n

l

d
e
d
u

i

n

t

h

i

s

m

a

t

e

i
r

a

l

c

l

s
s
a

.

p

.

T

e
h

f

o

l
l

o

w

i

g
n

s

a
h

l
l

o
n

t

e
b

i

c
n

l

d
e
d
u

i

e
d
n

t

e

r

m

i

n

i

g
n

t

e
h

m

x
a

i

m

u

m

a

l
l

o

w

b
a

l

n
a
u
q
e

i
t
i
t

s
e

:

1

.

L

i

u
q

i

o
d

r

u
o
e
s
a
g

s

f

e
u

l

i

n

f

e
u

l

t

k
n
a

s

h
e
v
n
o

i

c

l

s
e

.

2

.

L

i

u
q

i

o
d

r

u
o
e
s
a
g

s

f

e
u

l

i

n

f

e
u

l

t

k
n
a

s

n
o

m

o

t

o

i
r

u
q
e
d
e
z

i

p

m

n
e

t

e
p
o

r

a

t

d
e

i

o
c
c
a
n

r

e
c
n
a
d

w

t
i

h

t

h

i

s

e
d
o
c

.

3

.

G

u
o
e
s
a

s

f

e
u

l

s

i

p
n

i

p

i

g
n

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

d
n
a

i
f

p
p
a
d
e
x

i
l

s
e
c
n
a

r

u
g
e

l

a

t

y
b
d
e

t

e
h

I

n

t

r
e

a
n

i
t

a
n
o

l

F

e
u

l

G

a

s

C

e
d
o

.

4

.

L

i

u
q

i

d

f

e
u

l

s

i

p
n

i

p

i

g
n

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

d
n
a

i
f

p
p
a
d
e
x

i
l

s
e
c
n
a

r

u
g
e

l

a

t

y
b
d
e

t

e
h

I

n

t

r
e

a
n

i
t

a
n
o

l

M

n
a
h
c
e

i

a
c

l

C

e
d
o

.

5

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:15 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

[F] TABLE 307.1(2)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL POSING A HEALTH HAZARDa, b, c, i

MATERIAL

Solid pounds
(cubic feet)

STORAGEd
Liquid gallons
(pounds)e, f

Gas (cubic feet
at NTP)e

Solid
poundse

USE-CLOSED SYSTEMSd
Liquid gallons
Gas (cubic feet
(pounds)e
at NTP)e

USE-OPEN SYSTEMSd
Solid
Liquid gallons
poundse
(pounds)e

Corrosive

5,000

500

Highly toxic

10

(10)h

Toxic

500

(500)h

Gaseous 810f
Liquefied
(150)h
Gaseous 20g
Liquefied (4)g, h
Gaseous 810f
Liquefied
(150)f, h

5,000

10

500

500

(10)i

(500)i

Gaseous 810f
Liquefied
(150)h
Gaseous 20g
Liquefied (4)g, h
Gaseous 810f
Liquefied
(150)f, h

1,000

3

125

100

(3)i

(125)

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.
a. For use of control areas, see Section 414.2.
b. In retail and wholesale sales occupancies, the quantities of medicines, foodstuffs, consumer or industrial products, and cosmetics, containing not more than 50 per-
cent by volume of water-miscible liquids and with the remainder of the solutions not being flammable, shall not be limited, provided that such materials are pack-
aged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons.
c. For storage and display quantities in Group M and storage quantities in Group S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5, see Tables 414.2.5(1) and
414.2.5(2).
d. The aggregate quantity in use and storage shall not exceed the quantity listed for storage.
e. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1. Where Note f also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.
f. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the
International Fire Code. Where Note e also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.
g. Allowed only when stored in approved exhausted gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the International Fire Code.
h. Quantities in parenthesis indicate quantity units in parenthesis at the head of each column.
i. For gallons of liquids, divide the amount in pounds by 10 in accordance with Section 2703.1.2 of the International Fire Code.

➡

307.1.1 Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials in any
quantity shall conform to the requirements of this code,
including Section 414, and the International Fire Code.

[F] 307.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.

AEROSOL. A product that is dispensed from an aerosol con-
tainer by a propellant.

Aerosol products shall be classified by means of the calcula-
tion of their chemical heats of combustion and shall be desig-
nated Level 1, 2 or 3.

Level 1 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat
of combustion that is less than or equal to 8,600 British ther-
mal units per pound (Btu/lb) (20 kJ/g).

Level 2 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat
of combustion that is greater than 8,600 Btu/lb (20 kJ/g), but
less than or equal to 13,000 Btu/lb (30 kJ/g).

Level 3 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat
combustion that is greater than 13,000 Btu/lb (30 kJ/g).

AEROSOL CONTAINER. A metal can or a glass or plastic
bottle designed to dispense an aerosol. Metal cans shall be lim-
ited to a maximum size of 33.8 fluid ounces (1000 ml). Glass or
plastic bottles shall be limited to a maximum size of 4 fluid
ounces (118 ml).

BALED COTTON. A natural seed fiber wrapped in and
secured with industry accepted materials, usually consisting of
burlap, woven polypropylene, polyethylene or cotton or sheet
polyethylene, and secured with steel, synthetic or wire bands or

wire; also includes linters (lint removed from the cottonseed)
and motes (residual materials from the ginning process).

BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED. Cotton made into
banded bales with a packing density of at least 22 pounds per
cubic foot (360 kg/m3), and dimensions complying with the fol-
lowing: a length of 55 inches (1397 ± 20 mm), a width of 21
inches (533.4 ± 20 mm) and a height of 27.6 to 35.4 inches (701
to 899 mm).

BARRICADE. A structure that consists of a combination of
walls, floor and roof, which is designed to withstand the rapid
release of energy in an explosion and which is fully confined,
partially vented or fully vented; or other effective method of
shielding from explosive materials by a natural or artificial bar-
rier.

Artificial barricade. An artificial mound or revetment a
minimum thickness of 3 feet (914 mm).

Natural barricade. Natural features of the ground, such as
hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding
exposures that require protection cannot be seen from the
magazine or building containing explosives when the trees
are bare of leaves.

BOILING POINT. The temperature at which the vapor pres-
sure of a liquid equals the atmospheric pressure of 14.7 pounds
per square inch (psi) (101 kPa) gage or 760 mm of mercury.
Where an accurate boiling point is unavailable for the material
in question, or for mixtures which do not have a constant boil-
ing point, for the purposes of this classification, the 20-percent
evaporated point of a distillation performed in accordance with
ASTM D 86 shall be used as the boiling point of the liquid.

28

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:16 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CLOSED SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous
material involving a closed vessel or system that remains
closed during normal operations where vapors emitted by the
product are not liberated outside of the vessel or system and the
product is not exposed to the atmosphere during normal opera-
tions; and all uses of compressed gases. Examples of closed
systems for solids and liquids include product conveyed
through a piping system into a closed vessel, system or piece of
equipment.
COMBUSTIBLE DUST. Finely divided solid material that is
420 microns or less in diameter and which, when dispersed in
air in the proper proportions, could be ignited by a flame, spark
or other source of ignition. Combustible dust will pass through
a U.S. No. 40 standard sieve.
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS. Readily ignitable and free-burn-
ing materials in a fibrous or shredded form, such as cocoa fiber,
cloth, cotton, excelsior, hay, hemp, henequen, istle, jute, kapok,
oakum, rags, sisal, Spanish moss, straw, tow, wastepaper, cer-
tain synthetic fibers or other like materials. This definition does
not include densely packed baled cotton.
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup
flash point at or above 100°F (38°C). Combustible liquids shall
be subdivided as follows:
Class II. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above
100°F (38°C) and below 140°F (60°C).
Class IIIA. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or
above 140°F (60°C) and below 200°F (93°C).
Class IIIB. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or
above 200°F (93°C).

The category of combustible liquids does not include com-
pressed gases or cryogenic fluids.
COMPRESSED GAS. A material, or mixture of materials,
that:
1. Is a gas at 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 pounds per square
inch atmosphere (psia) (101 kPa) of pressure; and
2. Has a boiling point of 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 psia
(101 kPa) which is either liquefied, nonliquefied or in
solution, except those gases which have no other health-
or physical-hazard properties are not considered to be
compressed until the pressure in the packaging exceeds
41 psia (282 kPa) at 68°F (20°C).
The states of a compressed gas are categorized as follows:
1. Nonliquefied compressed gases are gases, other than
those in solution, which are in a packaging under the
charged pressure and are entirely gaseous at a tempera-
ture of 68°F (20°C).
2. Liquefied compressed gases are gases that, in a packag-
ing under the charged pressure, are partially liquid at a
temperature of 68°F (20°C).
3. Compressed gases in solution are nonliquefied gases that
are dissolved in a solvent.
4. Compressed gas mixtures consist of a mixture of two or
more compressed gases contained in a packaging, the

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

hazard properties of which are represented by the proper-
ties of the mixture as a whole.
CONTROL AREA. Spaces within a building where quanti-
ties of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allow-
able quantities per control area are stored, dispensed, used or
handled. See also the definition of “Outdoor control area” in
the International Fire Code.
CORROSIVE. A chemical that causes visible destruction of,
or irreversible alterations in, living tissue by chemical action at
the point of contact. A chemical shall be considered corrosive
if, when tested on the intact skin of albino rabbits by the method
described in DOTn 49 CFR, Part 173.137, such a chemical
destroys or changes irreversibly the structure of the tissue at the
point of contact following an exposure period of 4 hours. This
term does not refer to action on inanimate surfaces.
CRYOGENIC FLUID. A liquid having a boiling point lower
than -150°F (-101°C) at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmo-
sphere (psia) (an absolute pressure of 101 kPa).
DAY BOX. A portable magazine designed to hold explosive
materials constructed in accordance with the requirements for
a Type 3 magazine as defined and classified in Chapter 33 of
the International Fire Code.
DEFLAGRATION. An exothermic reaction, such as the
extremely rapid oxidation of a flammable dust or vapor in air,
in which the reaction progresses through the unburned material
at a rate less than the velocity of sound. A deflagration can have
an explosive effect.
DETONATION. An exothermic reaction characterized by the
presence of a shock wave in the material which establishes and
maintains the reaction. The reaction zone progresses through
the material at a rate greater than the velocity of sound. The
principal heating mechanism is one of shock compression.
Detonations have an explosive effect.
DISPENSING. The pouring or transferring of any material
from a container, tank or similar vessel, whereby vapors, dusts,
fumes, mists or gases are liberated to the atmosphere.
EXPLOSION. An effect produced by the sudden violent
expansion of gases, which may be accompanied by a shock
wave or disruption, or both, of enclosing materials or struc-
tures. An explosion could result from any of the following:
1. Chemical changes such as rapid oxidation, deflagration
or detonation, decomposition of molecules and runaway
polymerization (usually detonations).
2. Physical changes such as pressure tank ruptures.
3. Atomic changes (nuclear fission or fusion).
EXPLOSIVE. A chemical compound, mixture or device, the
primary or common purpose of which is to function by explo-
sion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black
powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety
fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters and display
fireworks, 1.3G (Class B, Special).
The term “explosive” includes any material determined to be
within the scope of USC Title 18: Chapter 40 and also includes
any material classified as an explosive other than consumer

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

29

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:16 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common) by the hazardous materi-
als regulations of DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-185.

High explosive. Explosive material, such as dynamite,
which can be caused to detonate by means of a No. 8 test
blasting cap when unconfined.

Low explosive. Explosive material that will burn or defla-
grate when ignited. It is characterized by a rate of reaction
that is less than the speed of sound. Examples of low explo-
sives include, but are not limited to, black powder; safety
fuse; igniters; igniter cord; fuse lighters; fireworks, 1.3G
(Class B, Special) and propellants, 1.3C.

Mass-detonating explosives. Division 1.1, 1.2 and 1.5
explosives alone or in combination, or loaded into various
types of ammunition or containers, most of which can be
expected to explode virtually instantaneously when a small
portion is subjected to fire, severe concussion, impact, the
impulse of an initiating agent or the effect of a considerable
discharge of energy from without. Materials that react in
this manner represent a mass explosion hazard. Such an
explosive will normally cause severe structural damage to
adjacent objects. Explosive propagation could occur imme-
diately to other items of ammunition and explosives stored
sufficiently close to and not adequately protected from the
initially exploding pile with a time interval short enough so
that two or more quantities must be considered as one for
quantity-distance purposes.

UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives. The former classification
system used by DOTn included the terms “high” and “low”
explosives as defined herein. The following terms further
define explosives under the current system applied by
DOTn for all explosive materials defined as hazard Class 1
materials. Compatibility group letters are used in concert
with the division to specify further limitations on each divi-
sion noted (i.e., the letter G identifies the material as a pyro-
technic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic
substance and similar materials).

Division 1.1. Explosives that have a mass explosion haz-
ard. A mass explosion is one which affects almost the
entire load instantaneously.

Division 1.2. Explosives that have a projection hazard
but not a mass explosion hazard.

Division 1.3. Explosives that have a fire hazard and
either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard
or both, but not a mass explosion hazard.

Division 1.4. Explosives that pose a minor explosion
hazard. The explosive effects are largely confined to the
package and no projection of fragments of appreciable
size or range is to be expected. An external fire must not
cause virtually instantaneous explosion of almost the
entire contents of the package.

Division 1.5. Very insensitive explosives. This division
is comprised of substances that have a mass explosion
hazard, but that are so insensitive there is very little prob-
ability of initiation or of transition from burning to deto-
nation under normal conditions of transport.

Division 1.6. Extremely insensitive articles which do not
have a mass explosion hazard. This division is comprised
of articles that contain only extremely insensitive deto-
nating substances and which demonstrate a negligible
probability of accidental initiation or propagation.
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect for entertainment pur-
poses by combustion, deflagration or detonation that meets the
definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth
herein.
Fireworks, 1.3G. (Formerly Class B, Special Fireworks.)
Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials,
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to pro-
duce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration
or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not lim-
ited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2
grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing
more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other
display pieces which exceed the limits for classification as
1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks are also described as
fireworks, UN0335 by the DOTn.
Fireworks, 1.4G. (Formerly Class C, Common Fireworks.)
Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of
pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce vis-
ible or audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks
which comply with the construction, chemical composition
and labeling regulations of the DOTn for fireworks,
UN0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commis-
sion (CPSC) as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: Parts 1500 and
1507, are not explosive materials for the purpose of this
code.
FLAMMABLE GAS. A material that is a gas at 68°F (20°C)
or less at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmosphere (psia) (101
kPa) of pressure [a material that has a boiling point of 68°F
(20°C) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa)] which:
1. Is ignitable at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) when in a mixture of 13
percent or less by volume with air; or
2. Has a flammable range at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) with air of
at least 12 percent, regardless of the lower limit.
The limits specified shall be determined at 14.7 psi (101 kPa)
of pressure and a temperature of 68°F (20°C) in accordance
with ASTM E 681.
FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. A liquefied compressed
gas which, under a charged pressure, is partially liquid at a tem-
perature of 68°F (20°C) and which is flammable.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup flash
point below 100°F (38°C). Flammable liquids are further cate-
gorized into a group known as Class I liquids. The Class I cate-
gory is subdivided as follows:
Class IA. Liquids having a flash point below 73°F (23°C)
and a boiling point below 100°F (38°C).
Class IB. Liquids having a flash point below 73°F (23°C)
and a boiling point at or above 100°F (38°C).
Class IC. Liquids having a flash point at or above 73°F
(23°C) and below 100°F (38°C).

30

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:17 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

The category of flammable liquids does not include com-
pressed gases or cryogenic fluids.
FLAMMABLE MATERIAL. A material capable of being
readily ignited from common sources of heat or at a temperature
of 600°F (316°C) or less.
FLAMMABLE SOLID. A solid, other than a blasting agent or
explosive, that is capable of causing fire through friction,
absorption or moisture, spontaneous chemical change, or
retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which has an
ignition temperature below 212°F (100°C) or which burns so
vigorously and persistently when ignited as to create a serious
hazard. A chemical shall be considered a flammable solid as
determined in accordance with the test method of CPSC 16
CFR; Part 1500.44, if it ignites and burns with a self-sustained
flame at a rate greater than 0.1 inch (2.5 mm) per second along its
major axis.
FLASH POINT. The minimum temperature in degrees Fahren-
heit at which a liquid will give off sufficient vapors to form an
ignitable mixture with air near the surface or in the container, but
will not sustain combustion. The flash point of a liquid shall be
determined by appropriate test procedure and apparatus as spec-
ified in ASTM D 56, ASTM D 93 or ASTM D 3278.
HANDLING. The deliberate transport by any means to a point
of storage or use.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Those chemicals or substances
that are physical hazards or health hazards as defined and classi-
fied in this section and the International Fire Code, whether the
materials are in usable or waste condition.
HEALTH HAZARD. A classification of a chemical for which
there is statistically significant evidence that acute or chronic
health effects are capable of occurring in exposed persons. The
term “health hazard” includes chemicals that are toxic or highly
toxic, and corrosive.
HIGHLY TOXIC. A material which produces a lethal dose or
lethal concentration that falls within any of the following catego-
ries:
1. A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 50 mil-
ligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when admin-
istered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300
grams each.
2. A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 200
milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when
administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less if
death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of albino
rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.
3. A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50)
in air of 200 parts per million by volume or less of gas or
vapor, or 2 milligrams per liter or less of mist, fume or
dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for 1
hour (or less if death occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats
weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.
Mixtures of these materials with ordinary materials, such as
water, might not warrant classification as highly toxic. While
this system is basically simple in application, any hazard evalua-
tion that is required for the precise categorization of this type of

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

material shall be performed by experienced, technically compe-
tent persons.
INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS. Materials that, when
mixed, have the potential to react in a manner that generates
heat, fumes, gases or byproducts which are hazardous to life or
property.
INERT GAS. A gas that is capable of reacting with other mate-
rials only under abnormal conditions such as high tempera-
tures, pressures and similar extrinsic physical forces. Within
the context of the code, inert gases do not exhibit either physi-
cal or health properties as defined (other than acting as a simple
asphyxiant) or hazard properties other than those of a com-
pressed gas. Some of the more common inert gases include
argon, helium, krypton, neon, nitrogen and x enon.
OPEN SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous mate-
rial involving a vessel or system that is continuously open to the
atmosphere during normal operations and where vapors are
liberated, or the product is exposed to the atmosphere during
normal operations. Examples of open systems for solids and
liquids include dispensing from or into open beakers or con-
tainers, dip tank and plating tank operations.
OPERATING BUILDING. A building occupied in conjunc-
tion with the manufacture, transportation or use of explosive
materials. Operating buildings are separated from one another
with the use of intraplant or intraline distances.
ORGANIC PEROXIDE. An organic compound that contains
the bivalent -O-O- structure and which may be considered to be
a structural derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or both
of the hydrogen atoms have been replaced by an organic radi-
cal. Organic peroxides can pose an explosion hazard (detona-
tion or deflagration) or they can be shock sensitive. They can
also decompose into various unstable compounds over an
extended period of time.
Class I. Those formulations that are capable of deflagration
but not detonation.
Class II. Those formulations that burn very rapidly and that
pose a moderate reactivity hazard.
Class III. Those formulations that burn rapidly and that
pose a moderate reactivity hazard.
Class IV. Those formulations that burn in the same manner
as ordinary combustibles and that pose a minimal reactivity
hazard.
Class V. Those formulations that burn with less intensity
than ordinary combustibles or do not sustain combustion
and that pose no reactivity hazard.
Unclassified detonable. Organic peroxides that are capable
of detonation. These peroxides pose an extremely high
explosion hazard through rapid explosive decomposition.
OXIDIZER. A material that readily yields oxygen or other
oxidizing gas, or that readily reacts to promote or initiate com-
bustion of combustible materials and, if heated or contami-
nated, can result in vigorous self-sustained decomposition.
Class 4. An oxidizer that can undergo an explosive reaction
due to contamination or exposure to thermal or physical
shock and that causes a severe increase in the burning rate of

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

31

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:17 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

combustible materials with which it comes into contact.
Additionally, the oxidizer causes a severe increase in the
burning rate and can cause spontaneous ignition of combus-
tibles.
Class 3. An oxidizer that causes a severe increase in the
burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes
in contact.
Class 2. An oxidizer that will cause a moderate increase in
the burning rate of combustible materials with which it
comes in contact.
Class 1. An oxidizer that does not moderately increase the
burning rate of combustible materials.
OXIDIZING GAS. A gas that can support and accelerate
combustion of other materials.
PHYSICAL HAZARD. A chemical for which there is evi-
dence that it is a combustible liquid, cryogenic fluid, explosive,
flammable (solid, liquid or gas), organic peroxide (solid or liq-
uid), oxidizer (solid or liquid), oxidizing gas, pyrophoric
(solid, liquid or gas), unstable (reactive) material (solid, liquid
or gas) or water-reactive material (solid or liquid).
PYROPHORIC. A chemical with an autoignition tempera-
ture in air, at or below a temperature of 130°F (54.4°C).
PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION. A chemical mixture
that produces visible light displays or sounds through a
self-propagating, heat-releasing chemical reaction which is
initiated by ignition.
TOXIC. A chemical falling within any of the following cate-
gories:
1. A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more
than 50 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 500
milligrams per kilogram of body weight when adminis-
tered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300
grams each.
2. A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more
than 200 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than
1,000 milligrams per kilogram of body weight when
administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less
if death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of
albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.
3. A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50)
in air of more than 200 parts per million, but not more
than 2,000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, or
more than 2 milligrams per liter but not more than 20 mil-
ligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when adminis-
tered by continuous inhalation for 1 hour (or less if death
occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats weighing between
200 and 300 grams each.
UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL. A material, other
than an explosive, which in the pure state or as commercially
produced, will vigorously polymerize, decompose, condense
or become self-reactive and undergo other violent chemical
changes, including explosion, when exposed to heat, friction or
shock, or in the absence of an inhibitor, or in the presence of
contaminants, or in contact with incompatible materials.
Unstable (reactive) materials are subdivided as follows:

Class 4. Materials that in themselves are readily capable of
detonation or explosive decomposition or explosive reac-
tion at normal
temperatures and pressures. This class
includes materials that are sensitive to mechanical or local-
ized thermal shock at normal temperatures and pressures.
Class 3. Materials that in themselves are capable of detona-
tion or of explosive decomposition or explosive reaction but
which require a strong initiating source or which must be
heated under confinement before initiation. This class
includes materials that are sensitive to thermal or mechani-
cal shock at elevated temperatures and pressures.
Class 2. Materials that in themselves are normally unstable
and readily undergo violent chemical change but do not det-
onate. This class includes materials that can undergo chemi-
cal change with rapid release of energy at normal
temperatures and pressures, and that can undergo violent
chemical change at elevated temperatures and pressures.
Class 1. Materials that in themselves are normally stable but
which can become unstable at elevated temperatures and
pressure.
WATER -REACT IVE MATER IAL . A m a t e r i a l
t h a t
explodes; violently reacts; produces flammable, toxic or other
hazardous gases; or evolves enough heat to cause autoignition
or ignition of combustibles upon exposure to water or mois-
ture. Water-reactive materials are subdivided as follows:
Class 3. Materials that react explosively with water without
requiring heat or confinement.
Class 2. Materials that react violently with water or have the
ability to boil water. Materials that produce flammable,
toxic or other hazardous gases or evolve enough heat to
cause autoignition or ignition of combustibles upon expo-
sure to water or moisture.
Class 1. Materials that react with water with some release of
energy, but not violently.
[F] 307.3 High-hazard Group H-1. Buildings and structures
containing materials that pose a detonation hazard shall be
classified as Group H-1. Such materials shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
Detonable pyrophoric materials
Explosives:
Division 1.1
Division 1.2
Division 1.3
Exception: Materials that are used and maintained in
a form where either confinement or configuration will
not elevate the hazard from a mass fire to mass explo-
sion hazard shall be allowed in H-2 occupancies.
Division 1.4
Exception: Articles, including articles packaged for
shipment, that are not regulated as an explosive under
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms regula-
tions, or unpackaged articles used in process opera-
t i o n s t h a t d o n o t p r o p a g a t e a d e t o n a t i o n o r
deflagration between articles shall be allowed in H-3
occupancies.

32

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:18 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Division 1.5
Division 1.6

Organic peroxides, unclassified detonable
Oxidizers, Class 4
Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3 detonable and Class 4

[F] 307.4 High-hazard Group H-2. Buildings and structures
containing materials that pose a deflagration hazard or a hazard
from accelerated burning shall be classified as Group H-2.
Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the follow-
ing:

Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids which
are used or stored in normally open containers or sys-
tems, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at
more than 15 psi (103.4 kPa) gage.
Combustible dusts
Cryogenic fluids, flammable
Flammable gases
Organic peroxides, Class I
Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally open
containers or systems, or in closed containers or systems
pressurized at more than 15 psi (103 kPa) gage
Pyrophoric liquids, solids and gases, nondetonable
Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3, nondetonable
Water-reactive materials, Class 3

[F] 307.5 High-hazard Group H-3. Buildings and structures
containing materials that readily support combustion or that
pose a physical hazard shall be classified as Group H-3. Such
materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids that
are used or stored in normally closed containers or
systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch g auge
(103.4 kPa) or less
Combustible fibers, other than densely packed baled cotton
Consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common)
Cryogenic fluids, oxidizing
Flammable solids
Organic peroxides, Class II and III
Oxidizers, Class 2
Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally
closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per
square inch gauge (103 kPa) or less
Oxidizing gases
Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 2
Water-reactive materials, Class 2

[F] 307.6 High-hazard Group H-4. Buildings and structures
which contain materials that are health hazards shall be classi-
fied as Group H-4. Such materials shall include, but not be lim-
ited to, the following:

Corrosives
Highly toxic materials
Toxic materials

[F] 307.7 High-hazard Group H-5 structures. Semiconduc-
tor fabrication facilities and comparable research and develop-
ment areas in which hazardous production materials (HPM)
are used and the aggregate quantity of materials is in excess of
those listed in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) shall be classified

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

as Group H-5. Such facilities and areas shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Section 415.8.
[F] 307.8 Multiple hazards. Buildings and structures containing
a material or materials representing hazards that are classified in
one or more of Groups H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4 shall conform to the
code requirements for each of the occupancies so classified.

SECTION 308
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I

308.1 Institutional Group I. Institutional Group I occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a
portion thereof, in which people are cared for or live in a super-
vised environment, having physical limitations because of
health or age are harbored for medical treatment or other care
or treatment, or in which people are detained for penal or cor-
rectional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is
restricted. Institutional occupancies shall be classified as
Group I-1, I-2, I-3 or I-4.
308.2 Group I-1. This occupancy shall include buildings,
structures or parts thereof housing more than 16 persons, on a
24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other
reasons, live in a supervised residential environment that pro-
vides personal care services. The occupants are capable of
responding to an emergency situation without physical assis-
tance from staff. This group shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
Alcohol and drug centers
Assisted living facilities
Congregate care facilities
Convalescent facilities
Group homes
Halfway houses
Residential board and care facilities
Social rehabilitation facilities
A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall
be classified as a Group R-3 or shall comply with the Interna-
tional Residential Code in accordance with Section 101.2. A
facility such as above, housing at least six and not more than 16
persons, shall be classified as Group R-4.
308.3 Group I-2. This occupancy shall include buildings and
structures used for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or
custodial care for persons who are not capable of self-preserva-
tion. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the follow-
ing:
Child care facilities
Detoxification facilities
Hospitals
Mental hospitals
Nursing homes
308.3.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
CHILD CARE FACILITIES. Facilities that provide
care on a 24-hour basis to more than five children, 21/2
years of age or less.

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

33

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:18 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

DETOXIFICATION FACILITIES. Facilities that
serve patients who are provided treatment for substance
abuse on a 24-hour basis and who are incapable of
self-preservation or who are harmful to themselves or
others.

H O S P I TA L S A N D M E N TA L H O S P I TA L S .
Buildings or portions thereof used on a 24-hour basis for
the medical, psychiatric, obstetrical or surgical treatment
of inpatients who are incapable of self-preservation.

NURSING HOMES. Nursing homes are long-term care
facilities on a 24-hour basis, including both intermediate
care facilities and skilled nursing facilities, serving more
than five persons and any of the persons are incapable of
self-preservation.

308.4 Group I-3. This occupancy shall include buildings and
structures that are inhabited by more than five persons who are
under restraint or security. An I-3 facility is occupied by per-
sons who are generally incapable of self-preservation due to
security measures not under the occupants’ control. This group
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Correctional centers
Detention centers
Jails
Prerelease centers
Prisons
Reformatories

Buildings of Group I-3 shall be classified as one of the occu-
pancy conditions indicated in Sections 308.4.1 through
308.4.5 (see Section 408.1).

308.4.1 Condition 1. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed from
sleeping areas, and other spaces where access or occupancy
is permitted, to the exterior via means of egress without
restraint. A Condition 1 facility is permitted to be con-
structed as Group R.

308.4.2 Condition 2. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed from
sleeping areas and any other occupied smoke compartment
to one or more other smoke compartments. Egress to the
exterior is impeded by locked exits.

308.4.3 Condition 3. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed within
individual smoke compartments, such as within a residen-
tial unit comprised of individual sleeping units and group
activity spaces, where egress is impeded by remote-con-
trolled release of means of egress from such a smoke com-
partment to another smoke compartment.

308.4.4 Condition 4. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is restricted from
an occupied space. Remote-controlled release is provided to
permit movement from sleeping units, activity spaces and
other occupied areas within the smoke compartment to
other smoke compartments.

308.4.5 Condition 5. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is restricted from
an occupied space. Staff-controlled manual release is pro-
vided to permit movement from sleeping units, activity
spaces and other occupied areas within the smoke compart-
ment to other smoke compartments.
308.5 Group I-4, day care facilities. This group shall include
buildings and structures occupied by persons of any age who
receive custodial care for less than 24 hours by individuals
other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage or
adoption, and in a place other than the home of the person cared
for. A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons shall
be classified as a Group R-3 or shall comply with the Interna-
tional Residential Code in accordance with Section 101.2.
Places of worship during religious functions are not included.
308.5.1 Adult care facility. A facility that provides accom-
modations for less than 24 hours for more than five unre-
lated adults and provides supervision and personal care
services shall be classified as Group I-4.
Exception: A facility where occupants are capable of
responding to an emergency situation without physical
assistance from the staff shall be classified as Group R-3.
308.5.2 Child care facility. A facility that provides supervi-
sion and personal care on less than a 24-hour basis for more
than five children 21/2 years of age or less shall be classified
as Group I-4.
Exception: A child day care facility that provides care
for more than five but no more than 100 children 21/2
years or less of age, where the rooms in which the chil-
dren are cared for are located on a level of exit discharge
serving such rooms and each of these child care rooms
has an exit door directly to the exterior, shall be classified
as Group E.

SECTION 309
MERCANTILE GROUP M

309.1 Mercantile Group M. Mercantile Group M occupancy
includes, among others, the use of a building or structure or a
portion thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise and
involves stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to
such purposes and accessible to the public. Mercantile occu-
pancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Department stores
Drug stores
Markets
Motor fuel-dispensing facilities
Retail or wholesale stores
Sales rooms
309.2 Quantity of hazardous materials. The aggregate quan-
t i t y o f n o n f l a m m a b l e s o l i d a n d n o n f l a m m a b l e o r
noncombustible liquid hazardous materials stored or displayed
in a single control area of a Group M occupancy shall not
exceed the quantities in Table 414.2.5(1).

34

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:19 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 310
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R

310.1 Residential Group R. Residential Group R includes,
among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion
thereof, for sleeping purposes when not classified as an Institu-
tional Group I or when not regulated by the International Resi-
dential Code in accordance with Section 101.2. Residential
occupancies shall include the following:
R-1 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where
the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including:
Boarding houses (transient)
Hotels (transient)
Motels (transient)
Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer
occupants are permitted to comply with the construction
requirements for Group R-3.
R-2 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more
than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily per-
manent in nature, including:
Apartment houses
Boarding houses (nontransient)
Convents
Dormitories
Fraternities and sororities
Hotels (nontransient)
Live/work units
Monasteries
Motels (nontransient)
Vacation timeshare properties
Congregate living facilities with 16 or fewer occupants are
permitted to comply with the construction requirements for
Group R-3.
R-3 Residential occupancies where the occupants are primar-
ily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2,
R-4 or I, including:
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units.
Adult care facilities that provide accommodations for five
or fewer persons of any age for less than 24 hours.
Child care facilities that provide accommodations for five or
fewer persons of any age for less than 24 hours.
Congregate living facilities with 16 or fewer persons.
Adult care and child care facilities that are within a sin-
gle-family home are permitted to comply with the Interna-
tional Residential Code.
R-4 Residential occupancies shall include buildings arranged
for occupancy as residential care/assisted living facilities
including more than five but not more than 16 occupants,
excluding staff.
Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for con-
struction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise pro-
vided for in this code or shall comply with the International
Residential Code provided the building is protected by an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.2.7.

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

310.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
BOARDING HOUSE. A building arranged or used for lodg-
ing for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied
as a single-family unit.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part
thereof that contains sleeping units where residents share bath-
room and/or kitchen facilities.
DORMITORY. A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of
closely associated rooms, for persons not members of the same
family group, under joint occupancy and single management,
as in college dormitories or fraternity houses.
PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. The care of residents who do
not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care.
Personal care involves responsibility for the safety of the resi-
dent while inside the building.
RESIDENTIAL CARE/ASSISTED LIVING FACILI-
TIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour
basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons,
live in a supervised residential environment which provides
personal care services. The occupants are capable of respond-
ing to an emergency situation without physical assistance from
staff. This classification shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: residential board and care facilities, assisted living
facilities, halfway houses, group homes, congregate care facili-
ties, social rehabilitation facilities, alcohol and drug abuse cen-
ters and convalescent facilities.
TRANSIENT. Occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit
for not more than 30 days.

SECTION 311
STORAGE GROUP S

311.1 Storage Group S. Storage Group S occupancy includes,
among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion
thereof, for storage that is not classified as a hazardous occu-
pancy.
311.2 Moderate-hazard storage, Group S-1. Buildings
occupied for storage uses that are not classified as Group S-2,
including, but not limited to, storage of the following:
Aerosols, Levels 2 and 3
Aircraft hangar (storage and repair)
Bags: cloth, burlap and paper
Bamboos and rattan
Baskets
Belting: canvas and leather
Books and paper in rolls or packs
Boots and shoes
Buttons, including cloth covered, pearl or bone
Cardboard and cardboard boxes
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel
Cordage
Dry boat storage (indoor)
Furniture

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:19 AM

13

SECTION 312
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U

312.1 General. Buildings and structures of an accessory char-
acter and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific
occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to
conform to the requirements of this code commensurate with
the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Agricultural buildings
Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family
residence (see Section 412.5)
Barns
Carports
Fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) high
Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy
Greenhouses
Livestock shelters
Private garages
Retaining walls
Sheds
Stables
Tanks
Towers

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

➡

Furs
Glues, mucilage, pastes and size
Grains
Horns and combs, other than celluloid
Leather
Linoleum
Lumber
Motor vehicle repair garages complying with the maximum
allowable quantities of hazardous materials listed in
Table 307.1(1) (see Section 406.6)
Photo engravings
Resilient flooring
Silks
Soaps
Sugar
Tires, bulk storage of
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff
Upholstery and mattresses
Wax candles
311.3 Low-hazard storage, Group S-2. Includes, among oth-
ers, buildings used for the storage of noncombustible materials
such as products on wood pallets or in paper cartons with or
without single thickness divisions; or in paper wrappings. Such
products are permitted to have a negligible amount of plastic
trim, such as knobs, handles or film wrapping. Group S-2 stor-
age uses shall include, but not be limited to, storage of the fol-
lowing:
Asbestos
Beverages up to and including 16-percent alcohol in metal,
glass or ceramic containers
Cement in bags
Chalk and crayons
Dairy products in nonwaxed coated paper containers
Dry cell batteries
Electrical coils
Electrical motors
Empty cans
Food products
Foods in noncombustible containers
Fresh fruits and vegetables in nonplastic trays or containers
Frozen foods
Glass
Glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombustible liquids
Gypsum board
Inert pigments
Ivory
Meats
Metal cabinets
Metal desks with plastic tops and trim
Metal parts
Metals
Mirrors
Oil-filled and other types of distribution transformers
Parking garages, open or enclosed
Porcelain and pottery
Stoves
Talc and soapstones
Washers and dryers

36

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

03_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 11:28:19 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 4

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED
ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

SECTION 401
SCOPE
401.1 Detailed use and occupancy requirements. In addition
to the occupancy and construction requirements in this code,
the provisions of this chapter apply to the special uses and
occupancies described herein.

SECTION 402
COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS

402.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to
buildings or structures defined herein as covered mall buildings
not exceeding three floor levels at any point nor more than three
stories above grade plane. Except as specifically required by
this section, covered mall buildings shall meet applicable pro-
visions of this code.
Exceptions:
1. Foyers and lobbies of Groups B, R-1 and R-2 are not
required to comply with this section.
2. Buildings need not comply with the provisions of this
section when they totally comply with other applica-
ble provisions of this code.
402.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
ANCHOR BUILDING. An exterior perimeter building of a
group other than H having direct access to a covered mall build-
ing but having required means of egress independent of the
mall.
COVERED MALL BUILDING. A single building enclosing
a number of tenants and occupants, such as retail stores, drink-
ing and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement
facilities, passenger transportation terminals, offices and other
similar uses wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance
into one or more malls. For the purpose of this chapter, anchor
buildings shall not be considered as a part of the covered mall
building. The term “covered mall building” shall include open
mall buildings as defined below.
Mall. A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a
covered mall building that serves as access for two or more
tenants and not to exceed three levels that are open to each
other. The term “mall” shall include open malls as defined
below.
Open mall. An unroofed common pedestrian way serving a
number of tenants not exceeding three levels. Circulation at
levels above grade shall be permitted to include open exte-
rior balconies leading to exits discharging at grade.
Open mall building. Several structures housing a number
of tenants, such as retail stores, drinking and dining estab-

lishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, offices,
and other similar uses, wherein two or more tenants have a
main entrance into one or more open malls. For the purpose
of Chapter 4 of the International Building Code, anchor
buildings are not considered as a part of the open mall build-
ing.

FOOD COURT. A public seating area located in the mall that
serves adjacent food preparation tenant spaces.

GROSS LEASABLE AREA. The total floor area designed
for tenant occupancy and exclusive use. The area of tenant
occupancy is measured from the centerlines of joint partitions
to the outside of the tenant walls. All tenant areas, including
areas used for storage, shall be included in calculating gross
leasable area.

402.3 Lease plan. Each covered mall building owner shall pro-
vide both the building and fire departments with a lease plan
showing the location of each occupancy and its exits after the
certificate of occupancy has been issued. No modifications or
changes in occupancy or use shall be made from that shown on
the lease plan without prior approval of the building official.

402.4 Means of egress. Each tenant space and the covered mall
building shall be provided with means of egress as required by
this section and this code. Where there is a conflict between the
requirements of this code and the requirements of this section,
the requirements of this section shall apply.

402.4.1 Determination of occupant load. The occupant
load permitted in any individual tenant space in a covered
mall building shall be determined as required by this code.
Means of egress requirements for individual tenant spaces
shall be based on the occupant load thus determined.

402.4.1.1 Occupant formula. In determining required
means of egress of the mall, the number of occupants for
whom means of egress are to be provided shall be based
on gross leasable area of the covered mall building
(excluding anchor buildings) and the occupant load fac-
tor as determined by the following equation.

OLF = (0.00007) (GLA) + 25

(Equation 4-1)

where:
OLF = The occupant load factor (square feet per per-
son).
GLA = The gross leasable area (square feet).
Exception: Tenant spaces attached to a covered mall
building but with a means of egress system that is
totally independent of the covered mall building shall
not be considered as gross leasable area for determin-
ing the required means of egress for the covered mall
building.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

37

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:53 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

402.4.1.2 OLF range. The occupant load factor (OLF)
is not required to be less than 30 and shall not exceed 50.
402.4.1.3 Anchor buildings. The occupant load of
anchor buildings opening into the mall shall not be
included in computing the total number of occupants for
the mall.
402.4.1.4 Food courts. The occupant load of a food
court shall be determined in accordance with Section
1004. For the purposes of determining the means of
egress requirements for the mall, the food court occupant
load shall be added to the occupant load of the covered
mall building as calculated above.
402.4.2 Number of means of egress. Wherever the dis-
tance of travel to the mall from any location within a tenant
space used by persons other than employees exceeds 75
feet (22 860 mm) or the tenant space has an occupant load
of 50 or more, not less than two means of egress shall be
provided.
402.4.3 Arrangements of means of egress. Assembly
occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more shall be
so located in the covered mall building that their entrance
will be immediately adjacent to a principal entrance to the
mall and shall have not less than one-half of their required
means of egress opening directly to the exterior of the cov-
ered mall building.

402.4.3.1 Anchor building means of egress. Required

means of egress for anchor buildings shall be provided
independently from the mall means of egress system.
The occupant load of anchor buildings opening into the
mall shall not be included in determining means of egress
requirements for the mall. The path of egress travel of
malls shall not exit through anchor buildings. Malls ter-
minating at an anchor building where no other means of
egress has been provided shall be considered as a
dead-end mall.
402.4.4 Distance to exits. Within each individual tenant
space in a covered mall building, the maximum distance of
travel from any point to an exit or entrance to the mall shall
not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm).

The maximum distance of travel from any point within a
mall to an exit shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm).
402.4.5 Access to exits. Where more than one exit is
required, they shall be so arranged that it is possible to travel
in either direction from any point in a mall to separate exits.
The minimum width of an exit passageway or corridor from
a mall shall be 66 inches (1676 mm).
Exception: Dead ends not exceeding a length equal to
twice the width of the mall measured at the narrowest
location within the dead-end portion of the mall.
402.4.5.1 Exit passageways. Where exit passageways
provide a secondary means of egress from a tenant space,
doorways to the exit passageway shall be protected by
1-hour fire door assemblies that are self- or automatic-
closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section
715.4.8.3.

402.4.6 Service areas fronting on exit passageways.
Mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, building service areas
and service elevators are permitted to open directly into exit
passageways, provided the exit passageway is separated
from such rooms with not less than 1-hour fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both. The minimum fire protection rating of openings in the
fire barriers shall be 1 hour.
402.5 Mall width. For the purpose of providing required egress,
malls are permitted to be considered as corridors but need not
comply with the requirements of Section 1005.1 of this code
where the width of the mall is as specified in this section.
402.5.1 Minimum width. The minimum width of the mall
shall be 20 feet (6096 mm). The mall width shall be suffi-
cient to accommodate the occupant load served. There shall
be a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) clear exit width to a
height of 8 feet (2438 mm) between any projection of a ten-
ant space bordering the mall and the nearest kiosk, vending
machine, bench, display opening, food court or other
obstruction to means of egress travel.
402.5.2 Minimum width open mall. The minimum floor
and roof opening width above grade shall be 20 feet (9096
mm) in open malls.
402.6 Types of construction. The area of any covered mall
building, including anchor buildings, of Types I, II, III and IV
construction, shall not be limited provided the covered mall
building and attached anchor buildings and parking garages
are surrounded on all sides by a permanent open space of not
less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) and the anchor buildings do not
exceed three stories above grade plane. The allowable height
and area of anchor buildings greater than three stories above
grade plane shall comply with Section 503, as modified by
Sections 504 and 506. The construction type of open parking
garages and enclosed parking garages shall comply with Sec-
tions 406.3 and 406.4, respectively.
402.6.1 Reduced open space. The permanent open space of
60 feet (18 288 mm) shall be permitted to be reduced to not
less than 40 feet (12 192 mm), provided the following requ-
irements are met:
1. The reduced open space shall not be allowed for more
than 75 percent of the perimeter of the covered mall
building and anchor buildings.
2. The exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall
have a minimum fire-resistance rating of 3 hours.
3. Openings in the exterior wall facing the reduced open
space shall have opening protectives with a minimum
fire protection rating of 3 hours.
4. Group E, H, I or R occupancies are not within the cov-
ered mall building or anchor stores.

4 0 2 . 7 F i r e - r e s i s t a n c e - r a t e d s e p a r a t i o n . F i r e - r e s i s-
tance-rated separation is not required between tenant spaces
and the mall. Fire-resistance-rated separation is not required
between a food court and adjacent tenant spaces or the mall.
402.7.1 Attached garage. An attached garage for the stor-
age of passenger vehicles having a capacity of not more than

38

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:54 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

nine persons and open parking garages shall be considered
as a separate building where it is separated from the covered
mall building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both.
Exception: Where an open parking garage or enclosed
parking garage is separated from the covered mall build-
ing or anchor building a distance greater than 10 feet
(3048 mm), the provisions of Table 602 shall apply.
Pedestrian walkways and tunnels that attach the open
parking garage or enclosed parking garage to the cov-
ered mall building or anchor building shall be con-
structed in accordance with Section 3104.
402.7.2 Tenant separations. Each tenant space shall be
separated from other tenant spaces by a fire partition com-
plying with Section 709. A tenant separation wall is not
required between any tenant space and the mall.
402.7.3 Anchor building separation. An anchor building
shall be separated from the covered mall building by fire
walls complying with Section 706.
Exception: Anchor buildings of not more than three sto-
ries above grade plane that have an occupancy classifi-
cation the same as that permitted for tenants of the
covered mall building shall be separated by 2-hour
fire-resistive fire barriers complying with Section 707.
402.7.3.1 Openings between anchor building and
mall. Except for the separation between Group R-1
sleeping units and the mall, openings between anchor
buildings of Type IA, IB, IIA and IIB construction and
the mall need not be protected.
402.8 Interior finish. Interior wall and ceiling finishes within
the mall and exits shall have a minimum flame spread index and
smoke-developed index of Class B in accordance with Chapter
8. Interior floor finishes shall meet the requirements of Section
804.
[F] 402.9 Automatic sprinkler system. The covered mall
building and buildings connected shall be equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, which shall comply with the following:
1. The automatic sprinkler system shall be complete and
operative throughout occupied space in the covered mall
building prior to occupancy of any of the tenant spaces.
Unoccupied tenant spaces shall be similarly protected
unless provided with approved alternative protection.
2. Sprinkler protection for the mall shall be independent
from that provided for tenant spaces or anchors. Where
tenant spaces are supplied by the same system, they shall
be independently controlled.
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be
required in spaces or areas of open parking garages con-
structed in accordance with Section 406.3.
[F] 402.9.1 Standpipe system. The covered mall building
shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system as
required by Section 905.3.3.

402.10 Smoke control. Where a covered mall building con-
tains an atrium, a smoke control system shall be provided in
accordance with Section 404.5.
Exception: A smoke control system is not required in cov-
ered mall buildings when an atrium connects only two sto-
ries.
402.11 Kiosks. Kiosks and similar structures (temporary or
permanent) shall meet the following requirements:
1. Combustible kiosks or other structures shall not be
located within the mall unless constructed of any of the
following materials:
1.1. Fire-retardant-treated wood complying with
Section 2303.2.
1.2. Foam plastics having a maximum heat-release
rate not greater than 100 kilowatts (105 Btu/h)
when tested in accordance with the exhibit booth
protocol in UL 1975.
1.3. Aluminum composite material (ACM) having a
flame spread index of not more than 25 and a
smoke-developed index of not more than 450
when tested as an assembly in the maximum
thickness intended for use in accordance with
ASTM E 84 or UL 723.
2. Kiosks or similar structures located within the mall shall
be provided with approved fire suppression detection
devices.
3. The minimum horizontal separation between kiosks or
groupings thereof and other structures within the mall
shall be 20 feet (6096 mm).
4. Each kiosk or similar structure or groupings thereof shall
have a maximum area of 300 square feet (28 m2).
402 .12 Ch i ldren ’s p layground s truc ture s . S t ruc tu res
intended as children’s playgrounds that exceed 10 feet (3048
mm) in height and 150 square feet (14 m2) in area shall comply
with Sections 402.12.1 through 402.12.4.
402.12.1 Materials. Children’s playground structures shall
be constructed of noncombustible materials or of combusti-
ble materials that comply with the following:
1. Fire-retardant-treated wood.
2. Light-transmitting plastics complying with Section
2606.
3. Foam plastics (including the pipe foam used in
soft-contained play equipment structures) having a
maximum heat-release rate not greater than 100
kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975.
4. Aluminum composite material (ACM) meeting the
requirements of Class A interior finish in accordance
with Chapter 8 when tested as an assembly in the
maximum thickness intended for use.
5. Textiles and films complying with the flame propaga-
tion performance criteria contained in NFPA 701.
6. Plastic materials used to construct rigid components
of soft-contained play equipment structures (such as
tubes, windows, panels, junction boxes, pipes, slides

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

39

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:54 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

and decks) exhibiting a peak rate of heat release not
exceeding 400 kW/m2 when tested in accordance with
ASTM E 1354 at an incident heat flux of 50 kW/m2 in
the horizontal orientation at a thickness of 6 mm.
7. Ball pool balls, used in soft-contained play equipment
structures, having a maximum heat-release rate not
greater than 100 kilowatts when tested in accordance
with UL 1975. The minimum specimen test size shall
be 36 inches by 36 inches (914 mm by 914 mm) by an
average of 21 inches (533 mm) deep, and the balls
shall be held in a box constructed of galvanized steel
poultry netting wire mesh.
8. Foam plastics shall be covered by a fabric, coating or
film meeting the flame propagation performance cri-
teria of NFPA 701.
9. The floor covering placed under the children’s play-
ground structure shall exhibit a Class I interior floor
finish classification, as described in Section 804,
when tested in accordance with NFPA 253.
402.12.2 Fire protection. Children’s playground structures
located within the mall shall be provided with the same level
of approved fire suppression and detection devices required
for kiosks and similar structures.
402.12.3 Separation. Children’s playground structures
shall have a minimum horizontal separation from other
structures within the mall of 20 feet (6090 mm).
402.12.4 Area limits. Children’s playground structures
shall not exceed 300 square feet (28 m2) in area, unless a
special investigation has demonstrated adequate fire safety.
402.13 Security grilles and doors. Horizontal sliding or verti-
cal security grilles or doors that are a part of a required means of
egress shall conform to the following:
1. They shall remain in the full open position during the
period of occupancy by the general public.
2. Doors or grilles shall not be brought to the closed posi-
tion when there are 10 or more persons occupying spaces
served by a single exit or 50 or more persons occupying
spaces served by more than one exit.
3. The doors or grilles shall be openable from within with-
out the use of any special knowledge or effort where the
space is occupied.
4. Where two or more exits are required, not more than
one-half of the exits shall be permitted to include either a
horizontal sliding or vertical rolling grille or door.
[F] 402.14 Standby power. Covered mall buildings exceeding
50,000 square feet (4645 m2) shall be provided with standby
power systems that are capable of operating the emergency
voice/alarm communication system.
[F] 402.15 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.
Covered mall buildings exceeding 50,000 square feet (4645
m2) in total floor area shall be provided with an emergency
voice/alarm communication system. Emergency voice/alarm
communication systems serving a mall, required or otherwise,
shall be accessible to the fire department. The system shall be
provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

402.16 Plastic signs. Plastic signs affixed to the storefront of
any tenant space facing the mall shall be limited as specified in
Sections 402.16.1 through 402.16.5.2.
402.16.1 Area. Plastic signs shall not exceed 20 percent of
the wall area facing the mall.
402.16.2 Height and width. Plastic signs shall not exceed a
height of 36 inches (914 mm), except that if the sign is verti-
cal, the height shall not exceed 96 inches (2438 mm) and the
width shall not exceed 36 inches (914 mm).
402.16.3 Location. Plastic signs shall be located a mini-
mum distance of 18 inches (457 mm) from adjacent tenants.
402.16.4 Plastics other than foam plastics. Plastics other
than foam plastics used in signs shall be light-transmitting
plastics complying with Section 2606.4 or shall have a
self-ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or greater when
tested in accordance with ASTM D 1929, and a flame
spread index not greater than 75 and smoke-developed
index not greater than 450 when tested in the manner
intended for use in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723
or meet the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1 when
tested in accordance with NFPA 286.
402.16.4.1 Encasement. Edges and backs of plastic
signs in the mall shall be fully encased in metal.
402.16.5 Foam plastics. Foam plastics used in signs shall
have flame-retardant characteristics such that the sign has a
maximum heat-release rate of 150 kilowatts when tested in
accordance with UL 1975 and the foam plastics shall have
the physical characteristics specified in this section. Foam
plastics used in signs installed in accordance with Section
402.16 shall not be required to comply with the flame
spread and smoke-developed indexes specified in Section
2603.3.
402.16.5.1 Density. The minimum density of foam plas-
tics used in signs shall not be less than 20 pounds per
cubic foot (pcf) (320 kg/m3).
402.16.5.2 Thickness. The thickness of foam plastic
signs shall not be greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).
[F] 402.17 Fire department access to equipment. Rooms or
areas containing controls for air-conditioning systems, auto-
matic fire-extinguishing systems or other detection, suppres-
sion or control elements shall be identified for use by the fire
department.

SECTION 403
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS

403.1 Applicability. High-rise buildings shall comply with
Sections 403.2 through 403.6.
Exception: The provisions of Sections 403.2 through 403.6
shall not apply to the following buildings and structures:
1. Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Sec-
tion 412.3.
2. Open parking garages in accordance with Section
406.3.

40

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:55 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

3. Buildings with a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance
with Section 303.1.
4. Special industrial occupancies in accordance with
Section 503.1.1.
5. Buildings with a Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 occupancy in
accordance with Section 415.
403.2 Construction. The construction of high-rise buildings
shall comply with the provisions of Sections 403.2.1 through
403.2.4.
403.2.1 Reduction in fire-resistance
rating. The
fire-resistance-rating
reductions
listed
in
Sections
403.2.1.1 and 403.2.1.2 shall be allowed in buildings that
have sprinkler control valves equipped with supervisory ini-
tiating devices and water-flow initiating devices for each
floor.
403.2.1.1 Type of construction. The following reduc-
tions in the minimum fire-resistance rating of the build-
ing elements in Table 601 shall be permitted as follows:
1. For buildings not greater than 420 feet (128 m) in
building height, the fire-resistance rating of the
building elements in Type IA construction shall be
permitted to be reduced to the minimum fire-resis-
tance ratings for the building elements in Type IB.
Exception: The required fire-resistance rating
of columns supporting floors shall not be per-
mitted to be reduced.
2. In other than Group F-1, M and S-1 occupancies,
the fire-resistance rating of the building elements
in Type IB construction shall be permitted to be
reduced to the fire-resistance ratings in Type IIA.
3. The building height and building area limitations
of a building containing building elements with
reduced fire-resistance ratings shall be permitted
to be the same as the building without such reduc-
tions.
403.2.1.2 Shaft enclosures. For buildings not greater
than 420 feet (128 m) in building height, the required
fire-resistance rating of the fire barriers enclosing verti-
cal shafts, other than exit enclosures and elevator
hoistway enclosures, is permitted to be reduced to 1 hour
where automatic sprinklers are installed within the shafts
at the top and at alternate floor levels.
403.2.2 Seismic considerations. For seismic consider-
ations, see Chapter 16.
403.2.3 Structural integrity of exit enclosures and eleva-
tor hoistway enclosures. For high-rise buildings of occu-
pancy category III or IV in accordance with Section 1604.5,
and for all buildings that are more than 420 feet (128 m) in
building height, exit enclosures and elevator hoistway
enclosures shall comply with Sections 403.2.3.1 through
403.2.3.4.
403.2.3.1 Wall assembly. The wall assemblies making
up the exit enclosures and elevator hoistway enclosures
shall meet or exceed Soft Body Impact Classification

Level 2 as measured by the test method described in
ASTM C 1629/C 1629M.
403.2.3.2 Wall assembly materials. The face of the wall
assemblies making up the exit enclosures and elevator
hoistway enclosures that are not exposed to the interior
of the exit enclosure or elevator hoistway enclosure shall
be constructed in accordance with one of the following
methods:
1. The wall assembly shall incorporate not less than
two layers of impact-resistant construction board
each of which meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact
Classification Level 2 as measured by the test
method described in ASTM C 1629/C 1629M.
2. The wall assembly shall incorporate not less than
one layer of impact-resistant construction material
that meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classifi-
cation Level 3 as measured by the test method
described in ASTM C 1629/C 1629M.
3. The wall assembly incorporates multiple layers of
any material, tested in tandem, that meet or exceed
Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3 as mea-
sured by the test method described in ASTM C
1629/C 1629M.
403.2.3.3 Concrete and masonry walls. Concrete or
masonry walls shall be deemed to satisfy the require-
ments of Sections 403.2.3.1 and 403.2.3.2.
403.2.3.4 Other wall assemblies. Any other wall assem-
bly that provides impact resistance equivalent to that
required by Sections 403.2.3.1 and 403.2.3.2 for Hard
Body Impact Classification Level 3, as measured by the
test method described in ASTM C 1629/C 1629M, shall
be permitted.
403.2.4 Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM). The
bond strength of the SFRM installed throughout the build-
ing shall be in accordance with Table 403.2.4.

TABLE 403.2.4
MINIMUM BOND STRENGTH

HEIGHT OF BUILDINGa

SFRM MINIMUM BOND STRENGTH

Up to 420 feet

Greater than 420 feet

430 psf

1,000 psf

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kW/m2.
a. Above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

[F] 403.3 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings and struc-
tures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and a secondary
water supply where required by Section 903.3.5.2.
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be
required in spaces or areas of:
1. Open parking garages in accordance with Section
406.3.
2. Te lecommun ica t ions equ ipmen t bu i ld ings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, asso-
ciated electrical power distribution equipment, bat-
teries and standby engines, provided that those spaces

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

41

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:56 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic
fire detection system in accordance with Section
907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the
building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or not less
than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both.
[F] 403.3.1 Number of sprinkler risers and system
design. Each sprinkler system zone in buildings that are
more than 420 feet (128 m) in building height shall be sup-
plied by a minimum of two risers. Each riser shall supply
sprinklers on alternate floors. If more than two risers are
provided for a zone, sprinklers on adjacent floors shall not
be supplied from the same riser.
[F] 403.3.1.1 Riser location. Sprinkler risers shall be
placed in exit enclosures that are remotely located in
accordance with Section 1015.2.
[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps.
Required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to a
minimum of two water mains located in different streets.
Separate supply piping shall be provided between each con-
nection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection
and the supply piping between the connection and the
pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure
required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be
permitted provided the main is valved such that an inter-
ruption can be isolated so that the water supply will con-
tinue without interruption through at least one of the
connections.
403.4 Emergency systems. The detection, alarm and emer-
gency systems of high-rise buildings shall comply with Sec-
tions 403.4.1 through 403.4.8.
[F] 403.4.1 Smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be
provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1.
[F] 403.4.2 Fire alarms systems. A fire alarm system shall
be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.
[F] 403.4.3 Emergency voice/alarm communication sys-
tem. An emergency voice/alarm communication system
shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
[F] 403.4.4 Emergency responder radio coverage. Emer-
gency responder radio coverage shall be provided in accor-
dance with Section 510 of the International Fire Code.
[F] 403.4.5 Fire command. A fire command center com-
plying with Section 911 shall be provided in a location
approved by the fire department.
403.4.6 Smoke removal. To facilitate smoke removal in
post-fire salvage and overhaul operations, buildings and
structures shall be equipped with natural or mechanical ven-
tilation for removal of products of combustion in accor-
dance with one of the following:
1. Easily identifiable, manually operable windows or
panels shall be distributed around the perimeter of
each floor at not more than 50-foot (15 240 mm) inter-
vals. The area of operable windows or panels shall not

be less than 40 square feet (3.7 m2) per 50 linear feet
(15 240 mm) of perimeter.
Exceptions:
1. In Group R-1 occupancies, each sleeping
unit or suite having an exterior wall shall be
permitted to be provided with 2 square feet
(0.19 m2) of venting area in lieu of the area
specified in Item 1.
2. Windows shall be permitted to be fixed pro-
vided that glazing can be cleared by fire
fighters.
2. Mechanical air-handling equipment providing one
exhaust air change every 15 minutes for the area
involved. Return and exhaust air shall be moved
directly to the outside without recirculation to other
portions of the building.
3. Any other approved design that will produce equiva-
lent results.
[F] 403.4.7 Standby power. A standby power system com-
plying with Chapter 27 shall be provided for standby power
loads specified in Section 403.4.7.2.
[F] 403.4.7.1 Special requirements for standby power
systems. If the standby system is a generator set inside a
building, the system shall be located in a separate room
enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both. System
supervision with manual start and transfer features shall
be provided at the fire command center.
[F] 403.4.7.2 Standby power loads. The following are
classified as standby power loads:
1. Power and lighting for the fire command center
required by Section 403.4.5;
2. Ventilation and automatic fire detection equip-
ment for smokeproof enclosures; and
3. Standby power shall be provided for elevators in
accordance with Sections 1007.4, 3003, 3007 and
3008.
[F] 403.4.8 Emergency power systems. An emergency
power system complying with Chapter 27 shall be provided
for emergency power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.1.
[F] 403.4.8.1 Emergency power loads. The following
are classified as emergency power loads:
1. Exit signs and means of egress illumination
required by Chapter 10;
2. Elevator car lighting;
3. Emergency voice/alarm communications systems;
4. Automatic fire detection systems;
5. Fire alarm systems; and
6. Electrically powered fire pumps.
403.5 Means of egress and evacuation. The means of egress
in high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.5.1
through 403.5.6.

42

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:56 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

403.5.1 Remoteness of exit stairway enclosures. The
required exit stairway enclosures shall be separated by a dis-
tance not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) or not less than
one-fourth of the length of the maximum overall diagonal
dimension of the building or area to be served, whichever is
less. The distance shall be measured in a straight line
between the nearest points of the exit stairway enclosures.
In buildings with three or more exit stairway enclosures, at
least two of the exit stairway enclosures shall comply with
this section. Interlocking or scissor stairs shall be counted
as one exit stairway.

403.5.2 Additional exit stairway. For buildings other than
Group R-2 that are more than 420 feet (128 m) in building
height, one additional exit stairway meeting the require-
ments of Sections 1009 and 1022 shall be provided in addi-
tion to the minimum number of exits required by Section
1021.1. The total width of any combination of remaining
exit stairways with one exit stairway removed shall not be
less than the total width required by Section 1005.1. Scissor
stairs shall not be considered the additional exit stairway
required by this section.
Exception: An additional exit stairway shall not be
required to be installed in buildings having elevators
used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance with
Section 3008.
403.5.3 Stairway door operation. Stairway doors other
than the exit discharge doors shall be permitted to be locked
from the stairway side. Stairway doors that are locked from
the stairway side shall be capable of being unlocked simul-
taneously without unlatching upon a signal from the fire
command center.
403.5.3.1 Stairway communication system. A tele-
phone or other two-way communications system con-
nected to an approved constantly attended station shall
be provided at not less than every fifth floor in each stair-
way where the doors to the stairway are locked.
403.5.4 Smokeproof exit enclosures. Every required level
exit stairway serving floors more than 75 feet (22 860 mm)
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access
shall comply with Sections 909.20 and 1022.9.
403.5.5 Luminous egress path markings. Luminous
egress path markings shall be provided in accordance with
Section 1024.
403.5.6 Emergency escape and rescue. Emergency escape
and rescue openings required by Section 1029 are not
required.
403 .6 Elevators . Elevator installation and operation in
high-rise buildings shall comply with Chapter 30 and Sections
403.6.1 and 403.6.2.
403.6.1 Fire service access elevator. In buildings with an
occupied floor more than 120 feet (36 576 mm) above the
lowest level of fire department vehicle access, a minimum
of one fire service access elevator shall be provided in accor-
dance with Section 3007.
403.6.2 Occupant evacuation elevators. Where installed
in accordance with Section 3008, passenger elevators for

general public use shall be permitted to be used for occupant
self-evacuation.

SECTION 404
ATRIUMS

404.1 General. In other than Group H occupancies, and where
permitted by Exception 5 in Section 708.2, the provisions of
this section shall apply to buildings or structures containing
vertical openings defined herein as “Atriums.”
404.1.1 Definition. The following word and term shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meaning shown herein.
ATRIUM. An opening connecting two or more stories
other than enclosed stairways, elevators, hoistways, escala-
tors, plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning or other equip-
ment, which is closed at the top and not defined as a mall.
Stories, as used in this definition, do not include balconies
within assembly groups or mezzanines that comply with
Section 505.
404.2 Use. The floor of the atrium shall not be used for other
than low fire hazard uses and only approved materials and dec-
orations in accordance with the International Fire Code shall
be used in the atrium space.
Exception: The atrium floor area is permitted to be used for
any approved use where the individual space is provided
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1.
[F] 404.3 Automatic sprinkler protection. An approved
automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the
entire building.
Exceptions:
1. That area of a building adjacent to or above the atrium
need not be sprinklered provided that portion of the
building is separated from the atrium portion by not
less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
2. Where the ceiling of the atrium is more than 55 feet
(16 764 mm) above the floor, sprinkler protection at
the ceiling of the atrium is not required.
[F] 404.4 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 907.2.14.
404.5 Smoke control. A smoke control system shall be
installed in accordance with Section 909.
Exception: Smoke control is not required for atriums that
connect only two stories.
404.6 Enclosure of atriums. Atrium spaces shall be separated
from adjacent spaces by a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
Exceptions:
1. A glass wall forming a smoke partition where auto-
matic sprinklers are spaced 6 feet (1829 mm) or less
along both sides of the separation wall, or on the room

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

43

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:57 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

side only if there is not a walkway on the atrium side,
and between 4 inches and 12 inches (102 mm and 305
mm) away from the glass and designed so that the
entire surface of the glass is wet upon activation of the
sprinkler system without obstruction. The glass shall
be installed in a gasketed frame so that the framing
system deflects without breaking (loading) the glass
before the sprinkler system operates.
2. A glass-block wall assembly in accordance with Sec-
tion 2110 and having a 3/4-hour fire protection rating.
3. The adjacent spaces of any three floors of the atrium
shall not be required to be separated from the atrium
where such spaces are accounted for in the design of
the smoke control system.
[F] 404.7 Standby power. Equipment required to provide
smoke control shall be connected to a standby power system in
accordance with Section 909.11.
404.8 Interior finish. The interior finish of walls and ceilings
of the atrium shall not be less than Class B with no reduction in
class for sprinkler protection.
404.9 Travel distance. In other than the lowest level of the
atrium, where the required means of egress is through the
atrium space, the portion of exit access travel distance within
the atrium space shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). The
travel distance requirements for areas of buildings open to the
atrium and where access to the exits is not through the atrium,
shall comply with the requirements of Section 1016.

SECTION 405
UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS

405.1 General. The provisions of this section apply to building
spaces having a floor level used for human occupancy more
than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the finished floor of the lowest
level of exit discharge.

Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, sprinklered in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.3.
2. Parking garages with automatic sprinkler systems in
compliance with Section 405.3.
3. Fixed guideway transit systems.
4. Grandstands, bleachers, stadiums, arenas and similar
facilities.
5. Where the lowest story is the only story that would
qualify the building as an underground building and
has an area not exceeding 1,500 square feet (139 m2)
and has an occupant load less than 10.
6. Pump ing stations and o ther similar mechan ical
spaces intended only for limited periodic use by ser-
vice or maintenance personnel.
405.2 Construction requirements. The underground portion
of the building shall be of Type I construction.
[F] 405.3 Automatic sprinkler system. The highest level of
exit discharge serving the underground portions of the building
and all levels below shall be equipped with an automatic sprin-

kler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
Water-flow switches and control valves shall be supervised in
accordance with Section 903.4.
405.4 Compartmentation. Compartmentation shall be in
accordance with Sections 405.4.1 through 405.4.3.
405.4.1 Number of compartments. A building having a
floor level more than 60 feet (18 288 mm) below the finished
floor of the lowest level of exit discharge shall be divided
into a minimum of two compartments of approximately
equal size. Such compartmentation shall extend through the
highest level of exit discharge serving the underground por-
tions of the building and all levels below.
Exception: The lowest story need not be compartmented
where the area does not exceed 1,500 square feet (139
m2) and has an occupant load of less than 10.
405.4.2 Smoke barrier penetration. The compartments
shall be separated from each other by a smoke barrier in
accordance with Section 710. Penetrations between the two
compartments shall be limited to plumbing and electrical
piping and conduit that are firestopped in accordance with
Section 713. Doorways shall be protected by fire door
assemblies that are automatic-closing by smoke detection in
accordance with Section 715.4.8.3 and are installed in
accordance with NFPA 105 and Section 715.4.3. Where
provided, each compartment shall have an air supply and an
exhaust system independent of the other compartments.
405.4.3 Elevators. Where elevators are provided, each
compartment shall have direct access to an elevator. Where
an elevator serves more than one compartment, an elevator
lobby shall be provided and shall be separated from each
compartment by a smoke barrier in accordance with Section
710. Doors shall be gasketed, have a drop sill and be auto-
matic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Sec-
tion 715.4.8.3.
[F] 405.5 Smoke control system. A smoke control system
shall be provided in accordance with Sections 405.5.1 and
405.5.2.
[F] 405.5.1 Control system. A smoke control system is
required to control the migration of products of combustion
in accordance with Section 909 and the provisions of this
section. Smoke control shall restrict movement of smoke to
the general area of fire origin and maintain means of egress
in a usable condition.
[F] 405.5.2 Compartment smoke control system. Where
compartmentation is required, each compartment shall have
an independent smoke control system. The system shall be
automatically activated and capable of manual operation in
accordance with Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19 .
[F] 405.6 Fire alarm systems. A fire alarm system shall be
provided where required by Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19 .
405.7 Means of egress. Means of egress shall be in accordance
with Sections 405.7.1 and 405.7.2.
405.7.1 Number of exits. Each floor level shall be provided
with a minimum of two exits. Where compartmentation is
required by Section 405.4, each compartment shall have a

44

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:58 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

minimum of one exit and shall also have an exit access door-
way into the adjoining compartment.
405.7.2 Smokeproof enclosure. Every required stairway
serving floor levels more than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the
finished floor of its level of exit discharge shall comply with
the requirements for a smokeproof enclosure as provided in
Section 1022.9.
[F] 405.8 Standby power. A standby power system complying
with Chapter 27 shall be provided standby power loads speci-
fied in Section 405.8.1.
[F] 405.8.1 Standby power loads. The following loads are
classified as standby power loads:
1. Smoke control system.
2. Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment
for smokeproof enclosures.
3. Fire pumps.
Standby power shall be provided for elevators in accor-
dance with Section 3003.
[F] 405.8.2 Pick-up time. The standby power system shall
pick up its connected loads within 60 seconds of failure of
the normal power supply.
[F] 405.9 Emergency power. An emergency power system
complying with Chapter 27 shall be provided for emergency
power loads specified in Section 405.9.1.
[F] 405.9.1 Emergency power loads. The following loads
are classified as emergency power loads:
1. Emergency voice/alarm communications systems.
2. Fire alarm systems.
3. Automatic fire detection systems.
4. Elevator car lighting.
5. Means of egress and exit sign illumination as required
by Chapter 10.
[F] 405.10 Standpipe system. The underground building shall
be equipped throughout with a standpipe system in accordance
with Section 905.

SECTION 406
MOTOR-VEHICLE-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
406.1 Private garages and carports.
406.1.1 Classification. Buildings or parts of buildings clas-
sified as Group U occupancies because of the use or charac-
ter of the occupancy shall not exceed 1,000 square feet (93
m2) in area or one story in height except as provided in Sec-
tion 406.1.2. Any building or portion thereof that exceeds
the limitations specified in this section shall be classified in
the occupancy group other than Group U that it most nearly
resembles.
406.1.2 Area increase. Group U occupancies used for the
storage of private or pleasure-type motor vehicles where no
repair work is completed or fuel is dispensed are permitted

to be 3,000 square feet (279 m2) when the following provi-
sions are met:
1. For a mixed occupancy building, the exterior wall and
opening protection for the Group U portion of the
building shall be as required for the major occupancy
of the building. For such a mixed occupancy building,
the allowable floor area of the building shall be as per-
mitted for the major occupancy contained therein.
2. For a building containing only a Group U occupancy,
the exterior wall shall not be required to have a
fire-resistance rating and the area of openings shall
not be limited when the fire separation distance is 5
feet (1524 mm) or more.
More than one 3,000-square-foot (279 m2) Group U
occupancy shall be permitted to be in the same building,
provided each 3,000-square-foot (279 m2) area is separated
by fire walls complying with Section 706.
406.1.3 Garages and carports. Carports shall be open on at
least two sides. Carport floor surfaces shall be of approved
noncombustible material. Carports not open on at least two
sides shall be considered a garage and shall comply with the
provisions of this section for garages.
Exception: Asphalt surfaces shall be permitted at
ground level in carports.
The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other
vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids
to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.
406.1.4 Separation. Separations shall comply with the fol-
lowing:
1. The private garage shall be separated from the dwell-
ing unit and its attic area by means of a minimum
1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board applied to the
garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be
separated from all habitable rooms above by not less
than a 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board or
equivalent. Door openings between a private garage
and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either
solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel
doors not less than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) thick, or
doors in compliance with Section 715.4.3. Openings
from a private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall
be self-closing and self-latching.
2. Ducts in a private garage and ducts penetrating the
walls or ceilings separating the dwelling unit from the
garage shall be constructed of a minimum 0.019-inch
(0.48 mm) sheet steel and shall have no openings into
the garage.
3. A separation is not required between a Group R-3 and
U carport, provided the carport is entirely open on two
or more sides and there are not enclosed areas above.
406.1.5 Automatic garage door openers. Automatic
garage door openers, if provided, shall be listed in accor-
dance with UL 325.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

45

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:58 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

406.2 Parking garages.
406.2.1 Classification. Parking garages shall be classified
as either open, as defined in Section 406.3, or enclosed and
shall meet the appropriate criteria in Section 406.4. Also see
Section 509 for special provisions for parking garages.
406.2.2 Clear height. The clear height of each floor level in
vehicle and pedestrian traffic areas shall not be less than 7
feet (2134 mm). Vehicle and pedestrian areas accommodat-
ing van-accessible parking required by Section 1106.5 shall
conform to ICC A117.1.
406.2.3 Guards. Guards shall be provided in accordance
with Section 1013. Guards serving as vehicle barrier sys-
tems shall comply with Sections 406.2.4 and 1013.
406.2.4 Vehicle barrier systems. Vehicle barrier systems
not less than 2 feet 9 inches (835 mm) high shall be placed at
the end of drive lanes, and at the end of parking spaces
where the vertical distance to the ground or surface directly
below is greater than 1 foot (305 mm). Vehicle barrier sys-
tems shall comply with the loading requirements of Section
1607.7.3.
Exception: Vehicle storage compartments in a mechani-
cal access parking garage.
406.2.5 Ramps. Vehicle ramps shall not be considered as
required exits unless pedestrian facilities are provided.
Vehicle ramps that are utilized for vertical circulation as
well as for parking shall not exceed a slope of 1:15 (6.67
percent).
406.2.6 Floor surface. Parking surfaces shall be of concrete
or similar noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials.
The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other
vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids
to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.
Exceptions:
1. Asphalt parking surfaces shall be permitted at
ground level.
2. Floors of Group S-2 parking garages shall not be
required to have a sloped surface.
406.2.7 Mixed occupancy separation. Parking garages
shall be separated from other occupancies in accordance
with Section 508.1.
406.2.8 Special hazards. Connection of a parking garage
with any room in which there is a fuel-fired appliance shall
be by means of a vestibule providing a two-doorway separa-
tion.
Exception: A single door shall be allowed provided the
sources of ignition in the appliance are at least 18 inches
(457 mm) above the floor.
406.2.9 Attached to rooms. Openings from a parking
garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall
not be permitted.

406.3 Open parking garages.
406.3.1 Scope. Except where specific provisions are made
in Sections 406.3.2 through 406.3.13, other requirements of
this code shall apply.
406.3.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES.
Open parking garages employing parking machines, lifts,
elevators or other mechanical devices for vehicles moving
from and to street level and in which public occupancy is
prohibited above the street level.
OPEN PARKING GARAGE. A structure or portion of a
structure with the openings as described in Section
406.3.3.1 on two or more sides that is used for the parking or
storage of private motor vehicles as described in Section
406.3.4.
RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. Open
parking garages employing a series of continuously rising
floors or a series of interconnecting ramps between floors
permitting the movement of vehicles under their own power
from and to the street level.
406.3.3 Construction. Open parking garages shall be of
Type I, II or IV construction. Open parking garages shall
meet the design requirements of Chapter 16. For vehicle
barrier systems, see Section 406.2.4.
406.3.3.1 Openings. For natural ventilation purposes,
the exterior side of the structure shall have uniformly dis-
tributed openings on two or more sides. The area of such
openings in exterior walls on a tier must be at least 20
percent of the total perimeter wall area of each tier. The
aggregate length of the openings considered to be pro-
viding natural ventilation shall constitute a minimum of
40 percent of the perimeter of the tier. Interior walls shall
be at least 20 percent open with uniformly distributed
openings.
Exception: Openings are not required to be distrib-
uted over 40 percent of the building perimeter where
the required openings are uniformly distributed over
two opposing sides of the building.
406.3.4 Uses. Mixed uses shall be allowed in the same
building as an open parking garage subject to the provisions
of Sections 402.7.1, 406.3.13, 508.1, 509.3, 509.4 and
509.7.
406.3.5 Area and height. Area and height of open parking
garages shall be limited as set forth in Chapter 5 for Group
S-2 occupancies and as further provided for in Section
508.1.
406.3.5.1 Single use. When the open parking garage is
used exclusively for the parking or storage of private
motor vehicles, with no other uses in the building, the
area and height shall be permitted to comply with Table

46

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:59 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

406 .3 .5 , along with increases allowed by Section
406.3.6.
Exception: The grade-level tier is permitted to con-
tain an office, waiting and toilet rooms having a total
combined area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93
m2). Such area need not be separated from the open
parking garage.
In open parking garages having a spiral or sloping
floor, the horizontal projection of the structure at any
cross section shall not exceed the allowable area per
parking tier. In the case of an open parking garage hav-
ing a continuous spiral floor, each 9 feet 6 inches (2896
mm) of height, or portion thereof, shall be considered a
tier.
The clear height of a parking tier shall not be less than
7 feet (2134 mm), except that a lower clear height is per-
mitted in mechanical-access open parking garages
where approved by the building official.

406.3.6 Area and height increases. The allowable area and
height of open parking garages shall be increased in accor-
dance with the provisions of this section. Garages with sides
open on three-fourths of the building’s perimeter are permit-
ted to be increased by 25 percent in area and one tier in
height. Garages with sides open around the entire building’s
perimeter are permitted to be increased by 50 percent in area
and one tier in height. For a side to be considered open under
the above provisions, the total area of openings along the
side shall not be less than 50 percent of the interior area of
the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally dis-
tributed along the length of the tier.
Allowable tier areas in Table 406.3.5 shall be increased
for open parking garages constructed to heights less than
the table maximum. The gross tier area of the garage shall
not exceed that permitted for the higher structure. At least
three sides of each such larger tier shall have continuous
horizontal openings not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in
clear height extending for at least 80 percent of the length of
the sides and no part of such larger tier shall be more than
200 feet (60 960 mm) horizontally from such an opening. In
addition, each such opening shall face a street or yard acces-
sible to a street with a width of at least 30 feet (9144 mm) for
the full length of the opening, and standpipes shall be pro-
vided in each such tier.

Open parking garages of Type II construction, with all
sides open, shall be unlimited in allowable area where the
building height does not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm). For a
side to be considered open, the total area of openings along
the side shall not be less than 50 percent of the interior area
of the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally
distributed along the length of the tier. All portions of tiers
shall be within 200 feet (60 960 mm) horizontally from such
openings or other natural ventilation openings as defined in
Section 406.3.3.1. These openings shall be permitted to be
provided in courts with a minimum dimension of 20 feet
(6096 mm) for the full width of the openings.

406.3.7 Fire separation distance. Exterior walls and open-
ings in exterior walls shall comply with Tables 601 and 602.
The distance to an adjacent lot line shall be determined in
accordance with Table 602 and Section 705.

406.3.8 Means of egress. Where persons other than parking
attendants are permitted, open parking garages shall meet
the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10. Where no
persons other than parking attendants are permitted, there
shall not be less than two 36-inch-wide (914 mm) exit stair-
ways. Lifts shall be permitted to be installed for use of
employees only, provided they are completely enclosed by
noncombustible materials.

406.3.9 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be installed where
required by the provisions of Chapter 9.

406.3.10 Sprinkler systems. Where required by other pro-

visions of this code, automatic sprinkler systems and
standpipes shall be installed in accordance with the provi-
sions of Chapter 9.

406.3.11 Enclosure of vertical openings. Enclosure shall
not be required for vertical openings except as specified in
Section 406.3.8.

406.3.12 Ventilation. Ventilation, other than the percentage
of openings specified in Section 406.3.3.1, shall not be
required.

406.3.13 Prohibitions. The following uses and alterations
are not permitted:
1. Vehicle repair work.
2. Parking of buses, trucks and similar vehicles.

TABLE 406.3.5
OPEN PARKING GARAGES AREA AND HEIGHT

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

AREA PER TIER
(square feet)

IA
IB
IIA
IIB
IV

Unlimited
Unlimited
50,000
50,000
50,000

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

HEIGHT (in tiers)

Mechanical access

Automatic sprinkler system

Ramp access

Unlimited
12 tiers
10 tiers
8 tiers
4 tiers

No

Unlimited
12 tiers
10 tiers
8 tiers
4 tiers

Yes

Unlimited
18 tiers
15 tiers
12 tiers
4 tiers

47

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:03:59 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

3. Partial or complete closing of required openings in
exterior walls by tarpaulins or any other means.
4. Dispensing of fuel.
406.4 Enclosed parking garages.

406.4.1 Heights and areas. Enclosed vehicle parking
garages and portions thereof that do not meet the definition
of open parking garages shall be limited to the allowable
heights and areas specified in Table 503 as modified by Sec-
tions 504, 506 and 507. Roof parking is permitted.

406.4.2 Ventilation. A mechanical ventilation system shall
be provided in accordance with the International Mechani-
cal Code.

406.5 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities.

406.5.1 Construction. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities
shall be constructed in accordance with the International
Fire Code and Sections 406.5.1 through 406.5.3 .

406.5.2 Vehicle fueling pad. The vehicle shall be fueled on
noncoated concrete or other approved paving material hav-
ing a resistance not exceeding 1 megohm as determined by
the methodology in EN 1081.

406.5.3 Canopies. Canopies under which fuels are dis-
pensed shall have a clear, unobstructed height of not less
than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm) to the lowest projecting ele-
ment in the vehicle drive-through area. Canopies and their
supports over pumps shall be of noncombustible materials,
fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Chapter 23,
wood of Type IV sizes or of construction providing 1-hour
fire resistance. Combustible materials used in or on a can-
opy shall comply with one of the following:
1. Shielded from the pumps by a noncombustible ele-
ment of the canopy, or wood of Type IV sizes;
2. Plastics covered by aluminum facing having a mini-
mum thickness of 0.010 inch (0.30 mm) or corro-
sion-resistant steel having a minimum base metal
thickness of 0.016 inch (0.41 mm). The plastic shall
have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a
smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in
the form intended for use in accordance with ASTM E
84 or UL 723 and a self-ignition temperature of 650°F
(343°C) or greater when tested in accordance with
ASTM D 1929; or
3. Panels constructed of light-transmitting plastic mate-
rials shall be permitted to be installed in canopies
erected over motor vehicle fuel-dispensing station
fuel dispensers, provided the panels are located at
least 10 feet (3048 mm) from any building on the
same lot and face yards or streets not less than 40 feet
(12 192 mm) in width on the other sides. The aggre-
gate areas of plastics shall not exceed 1,000 square
feet (93 m2). The maximum area of any individual
panel shall not exceed 100 square feet (9.3 m2).
406.5.3.1 Canopies used to support gaseous hydrogen
systems. Canopies that are used to shelter dispensing
operations where flammable compressed gases are

48

located on the roof of the canopy shall be in accordance
with the following:
1. The canopy shall meet or exceed Type I construc-
tion requirements.
2. Operations located under canopies shall be limited
to refueling only.
3. The canopy shall be constructed in a manner that
prevents the accumulation of hydrogen gas.
406.6 Repair garages.
406.6.1 General. Repair garages shall be constructed in
accordance with the International Fire Code and Sections
406.6.1 through 406.6.6. This occupancy shall not include
motor fuel-dispensing facilities, as regulated in Section
406.5.
406.6.2 Mixed uses. Mixed uses shall be allowed in the
same building as a repair garage subject to the provisions of
Section 508.1.
406.6.3 Ventilation. Repair garages shall be mechanically
ventilated in accordance with the International Mechanical
Code. The ventilation system shall be controlled at the
entrance to the garage.
406.6.4 Floor surface. Repair garage floors shall be of con-
crete or similar noncombustible and nonabsorbent materi-
als.
Exception: Slip-resistant, nonabsorbent, interior floor
finishes having a critical radiant flux not more than 0.45
W/cm2, as determined by NFPA 253, shall be permitted.
406.6.5 Heating equipment. Heating equipment shall be
installed in accordance with the International Mechanical
Code.

[F] 406.6.6 Gas detection system. Repair garages used for
repair of vehicles fueled by nonodorized gases, such as
hydrogen and nonodorized LNG, shall be provided with an
approved flammable gas detection system.
[F] 406.6.6.1 System design. The flammable gas detec-
tion system shall be calibrated to the types of fuels or
gases used by vehicles to be repaired. The gas detection
system shall be designed to activate when the level of
flammable gas exceeds 25 percent of the lower explosive
limit. Gas detection shall also be provided in lubrication
or chassis repair pits of garages used for repairing
nonodorized LNG-fueled vehicles.
[F] 406.6.6.2 Operation. Activation of the gas detection
system shall result in all of the following:
1. Initiation of distinct audible and visual alarm sig-
nals in the repair garage.
2. Deactivation of all heating systems located in the
repair garage.
3. Activation of the mechanical ventilation system,
where the system is interlocked with gas detection.
[F] 406.6.6.3 Failure of the gas detection system. Fail-
ure of the gas detection system shall result in the deacti-
va t i o n o f t h e h e a t i n g s y s t em , a c t iva t i o n o f t h e
mechanical ventilation system when the system is inter-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:00 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

locked with the gas detection system and cause a trouble
signal to sound in an approved location.

SECTION 407
GROUP I-2

407.1 General. Occupancies in Group I-2 shall comply with
the provisions of Sections 407.1 through 407.9 and other appli-
cable provisions of this code.
407.2 Corridors. Corridors in occupancies in Group I-2 shall
be continuous to the exits and separated from other areas in
accordance with Section 407.3 except spaces conforming to
Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.4.
407.2.1 Waiting and similar areas. Waiting areas and sim-
ilar spaces constructed as required for corridors shall be
permitted to be open to a corridor, only where all of the fol-
lowing criteria are met:
1. The spaces are not occupied for patient sleeping units,
treatment rooms, hazardous or incidental accessory
occupancies in accordance with Section 508.2.
2. The open space is protected by an automatic fire
detection system installed in accordance with Section
907.
3. The corridors onto which the spaces open, in the
same smoke compartment, are protected by an auto-
matic fire detection system installed in accordance
with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which
the spaces are located is equipped throughout with
quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section
903.3.2.
4. The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to
the required exits.
407.2.2 Nurses’ stations. Spaces for doctors’ and nurses’
charting, communications and related clerical areas shall be
permitted to be open to the corridor, when such spaces are
constructed as required for corridors.
407.2.3 Mental health treatment areas. Areas wherein
mental health patients who are not capable of self-preserva-
tion are housed, or group meeting or multipurpose therapeu-
tic spaces other than incidental accessory occupancies in
accordance with Section 508.2.5, under continuous super-
vision by facility staff, shall be permitted to be open to the
corridor, where the following criteria are met:
1. Each area does not exceed 1,500 square feet (140 m2).
2. The area is located to permit supervision by the facil-
ity staff.
3. The area is arranged so as not to obstruct any access to
the required exits.
4. The area is equipped with an automatic fire detection
system installed in accordance with Section 907.2.
5. Not more than one such space is permitted in any one
smoke compartment.
6. The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as
required for corridors.

407.2.4 Gift shops. Gift shops less than 500 square feet
(46.5 m2) in area shall be permitted to be open to the corri-
dor provided the gift shop and storage areas are fully
sprinklered and storage areas are protected in accordance
with Section 508.2.5.
407.3 Corridor walls. Corridor walls shall be constructed as
smoke partitions in accordance with Section 711.
407.3.1 Corridor doors. Corridor doors, other than those
in a wall required to be rated by Section 508.2.5 or for the
enclosure of a vertical opening or an exit, shall not have a
required fire protection rating and shall not be required to be
equipped with self-closing or automatic-closing devices,
but shall provide an effective barrier to limit the transfer of
smoke and shall be equipped with positive latching. Roller
latches are not permitted. Other doors shall conform to Sec-
tion 715.4.
407.3.2 Locking devices. Locking devices that restrict
access to the patient room from the corridor, and that are
operable only by staff from the corridor side, shall not
restrict the means of egress from the patient room except for
patient rooms in mental health facilities.
407.4 Smoke barriers. Smoke barriers shall be provided to
subdivide every story used by patients for sleeping or treatment
and to divide other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more
persons, into at least two smoke compartments. Such stories
shall be divided into smoke compartments with an area of not
more than 22,500 square feet (2092 m2) and the travel distance
from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier
door shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). The smoke barrier
shall be in accordance with Section 710.
407.4.1 Refuge area. At least 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) per
patient shall be provided within the aggregate area of corri-
dors, patient rooms, treatment rooms, lounge or dining
areas and other low-hazard areas on each side of each smoke
barrier. On floors not housing patients confined to a bed or
litter, at least 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) per occupant shall
be provided on each side of each smoke barrier for the total
number of occupants in adjoining smoke compartments.
407.4.2 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be
provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke
barriers without having to return through the smoke com-
partment from which means of egress originated.
407.4.3 Horizontal assemblies. Horizontal assemblies
supporting smoke barriers required by this section shall be
designed to resist the movement of smoke and shall comply
with Section 712.9.
[F] 407.5 Automatic sprinkler system. Smoke compartments
containing patient sleeping units shall be equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1. The smoke compartments shall be equipped with
approved quick-response or residential sprinklers in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.2.
[F] 407.6 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.
[F] 407.7 Automatic fire detection. Corridors in nursing
homes (both intermediate care and skilled nursing facilities),

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

49

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:01 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

detoxification facilities and spaces permitted to be open to the
corridors by Section 407.2 shall be equipped with an automatic
fire detection system. Hospitals shall be equipped with smoke
detection as required in Section 407.2.
Exceptions:
1. Corridor smoke detection is not required where
patient sleeping units are provided with smoke detec-
tors that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall
provide a visual display on the corridor side of each
patient sleeping unit and an audible and visual alarm
at the nursing station attending each unit.
2. Corridor smoke detection is not required where
patient sleeping unit doors are equipped with auto-
matic door-closing devices with integral smoke
detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance
with their listing, provided that the integral detectors
perform the required alerting function.
407.8 Secured yards. Grounds are permitted to be fenced and
gates therein are permitted to be equipped with locks, provided
that safe dispersal areas having 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) for
bed and litter patients and 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) for ambu-
latory patients and other occupants are located between the
building and the fence. Such provided safe dispersal areas shall
not be located less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the building
they serve.
407.9 Hyperbaric facilities. Hyperbaric facilities in Group I-2
occupancies shall meet the requirements contained in Chapter
20 of NFPA 99.

SECTION 408
GROUP I-3

408.1 General. Occupancies in Group I-3 shall comply with
the provisions of Sections 408.1 through 408.10 and other
applicable provisions of this code (see Section 308.4).
408.1.1 Definition. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
CELL. A room within a housing unit in a detention or cor-
rectional facility used to confine inmates or prisoners.
CELL TIER. Levels of cells vertically stacked above one
another within a housing unit.
HOUSING UNIT. A dormitory or a group of cells with a
common dayroom in Group I-3.
SALLYPORT. A security vestibule with two or more doors
or gates where the intended purpose is to prevent continuous
and unobstructed passage by allowing the release of only
one door or gate at a time.
408.2 Other occupancies. Buildings or portions of buildings
in Group I-3 occupancies where security operations necessitate
the locking of required means of egress shall be permitted to be
classified as a different occupancy. Occupancies classified as
other than Group I-3 shall meet the applicable requirements of
this code for that occupancy provided provisions are made for
the release of occupants at all times.

Means of egress from detention and correctional occupan-
cies that traverse other use areas shall, as a minimum, conform
to requirements for detention and correctional occupancies.
Exception: It is permissible to exit through a horizontal exit
into other contiguous occupancies that do not conform to
detention and correctional occupancy egress provisions but
that do comply with requirements set forth in the appropri-
ate occupancy, as long as the occupancy is not a Group H
use.
408.3 Means of egress. Except as modified or as provided for
in this section, the provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply.
408.3.1 Door width. Doors to resident sleeping units shall
have a clear width of not less than 28 inches (711 mm).
408.3.2 Sliding doors. Where doors in a means of egress are
of the horizontal-sliding type, the force to slide the door to its
fully open position shall not exceed 50 pounds (220 N) with a
perpendicular force against the door of 50 pounds (220 N).
408.3.3 Guard tower doors. A hatch or trap door not less
than 16 square feet (610 m2) in area through the floor and
having minimum dimensions of not less than 2 feet (610
mm) in any direction shall be permitted to be used as a por-
tion of the means of egress from guard towers.
408.3.4 Spiral stairways. Spiral stairways that conform to
the requirements of Section 1009.9 are permitted for access
to and between staff locations.
408.3.5 Ship ladders. Ship ladders shall be permitted for
egress from control rooms or elevated facility observation
rooms in accordance with Section 1009.11.
408.3.6 Exit discharge. Exits are permitted to discharge
into a fenced or walled courtyard. Enclosed yards or courts
shall be of a size to accommodate all occupants, a minimum
of 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the building with a net area of
15 square feet (1.4 m2) per person.
408.3.7 Sallyports. A sallyport shall be permitted in a
means of egress where there are provisions for continuous
and unobstructed passage through the sallyport during an
emergency egress condition.
408.3.8 Exit enclosures. One of the required exit enclo-
sures in each building shall be permitted to have glazing
installed in doors and interior walls at each landing level
providing access to the enclosure, provided that the follow-
ing conditions are met:
1. The exit enclosure shall not serve more than four floor
levels.
2. Exit doors shall not be less than 3/4-hour fire door
assemblies complying with Section 715.4
3. The total area of glazing at each floor level shall not
exceed 5,000 square inches (3 m2) and individual pan-
els of glazing shall not exceed 1,296 square inches
(0.84 m2).
4. The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an
automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system
shall be designed to wet completely the entire surface
of any glazing affected by fire when actuated.

50

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:02 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

5. The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed
in such a manner that the framing system will deflect
without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprin-
kler system operates.
6. Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse
rods, curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be
installed between the automatic sprinklers and the
glazing.
408.4 Locks. Egress doors are permitted to be locked in accor-
dance with the applicable use condition. Doors from a refuge
area to the exterior are permitted to be locked with a key in lieu
of locking methods described in Section 408.4.1. The keys to
unlock the exterior doors shall be available at all times and the
locks shall be operable from both sides of the door.

408.4.1 Remote release. Remote release of locks on doors
in a means of egress shall be provided with reliable means of
operation, remote from the resident living areas, to release
locks on all required doors. In Occupancy Conditions 3 or 4,
the arrangement, accessibility and security of the release
mechanism(s) required for egress shall be such that with the
minimum available staff at any time, the lock mechanisms
are capable of being released within 2 minutes.

Exception: Provisions for remote locking and unlocking
of occupied rooms in Occupancy Condition 4 are not
required provided that not more than 10 locks are neces-
sary to be unlocked in order to move occupants from one
smoke compartment to a refuge area within 3 minutes.
The opening of necessary locks shall be accomplished
with not more than two separate keys.

408.4.2 Power-operated doors and locks. Power-operated
sliding doors or power-operated locks for swinging doors
shall be operable by a manual release mechanism at the
door, and either emergency power or a remote mechanical
operating release shall be provided.

Exception: Emergency power is not required in facilities
with 10 locks or less complying with the exception to
Section 408.4.1.

408.4.3 Redundant operation. Remote release, mechani-
cally operated sliding doors or remote release, mechanically
operated locks shall be provided with a mechanically oper-
ated release mechanism at each door, or shall be provided
with a redundant remote release control.

408.4.4 Relock capability. Doors remotely unlocked under
emergency conditions shall not automatically relock when
closed unless specific action is taken at the remote location
to enable doors to relock.

408.5 Protection of vertical openings. Any vertical opening
shall be protected by a shaft enclosure in accordance with Sec-
tion 708, or shall be in accordance with Section 408.5.1.

408.5.1 Floor openings. Openings in floors within a hous-
ing unit are permitted without a shaft enclosure, provided all
of the following conditions are met:
1. The entire normally occupied areas so interconnected
are open and unobstructed so as to enable observation
of the areas by supervisory personnel;
2. Means of egress capacity is sufficient for all occu-
pants from all interconnected cell tiers and areas;
3. The height difference between the floor levels of the
highest and lowest cell tiers shall not exceed 23 feet
(7010 mm); and
4. Egress from any portion of the cell tier to an exit or
exit access door shall not require travel on more than
one additional floor level within the housing unit.
408.5.2 Shaft openings in communicating floor levels.
Where a floor opening is permitted between communicat-
ing floor levels of a housing unit in accordance with Section
408.5.1, plumbing chases serving vertically staked individ-
ual cells contained with the housing unit shall be permitted
without a shaft enclosure.
408.6 Smoke barrier. Occupancies in Group I-3 shall have
smoke barriers complying with Sections 408.8 and 710 to
divide every story occupied by residents for sleeping, or any
other story having an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into
at least two smoke compartments.
Exception: Spaces having a direct exit to one of the follow-
ing, provided that the locking arrangement of the doors
involved complies with the requirements for doors at the
smoke barrier for the use condition involved:
1. A public way.
2. A building separated from the resident housing area
by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly or 50 feet
(15 240 mm) of open space.
3. A secured yard or court having a holding space 50
feet (15 240 mm) from the housing area that provides
6 square feet (0.56 m2) or more of refuge area per
occupant, including residents, staff and visitors.
408.6.1 Smoke compartments. The maximum number of
residents in any smoke compartment shall be 200. The
travel distance to a door in a smoke barrier from any room
door required as exit access shall not exceed 150 feet (45
720 mm). The travel distance to a door in a smoke barrier
from any point in a room shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960
mm).
408.6.2 Refuge area. At least 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) per
occupant shall be provided on each side of each smoke bar-
rier for the total number of occupants in adjoining smoke
compartments. This space shall be readily available wher-
ever the occupants are moved across the smoke barrier in a
fire emergency.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

51

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:02 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

408.6.3 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be
provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke
barriers without having to return through the smoke com-
partment from which means of egress originates.
408.7 Security glazing. In occupancies in Group I-3, windows
and doors in 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707, fire partitions constructed in accordance with
Section 709 and smoke barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 710 shall be permitted to have security glazing
installed provided that the following conditions are met.
1. Individual panels of glazing shall not exceed 1,296
square inches (0.84 m2).
2. The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an auto-
matic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system shall be
designed to, when actuated, wet completely the entire
surface of any glazing affected by fire.
3. The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in
such a manner that the framing system will deflect with-
out breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler sys-
tem operates.
4. Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse rods,
curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be installed
between the automatic sprinklers and the glazing.
408.8 Subdivision of resident housing areas. Sleeping areas
and any contiguous day room, group activity space or other
common spaces where residents are housed shall be separated
from other spaces in accordance with Sections 408.8.1 through
408.8.4.
408.8.1 Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4. Each sleeping
area in Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4 shall be separated
from the adjacent common spaces by a smoke-tight parti-
tion where the travel distance from the sleeping area
through the common space to the corridor exceeds 50 feet
(15 240 mm).
408.8.2 Occupancy Condition 5. Each sleeping area in
Occupancy Condition 5 shall be separated from adjacent
sleeping areas, corridors and common spaces by a smoke-
tight partition. Additionally, common spaces shall be sepa-
rated from the corridor by a smoke-tight partition.
408.8.3 Openings in room face. The aggregate area of
openings in a solid sleeping room face in Occupancy Condi-
tions 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall not exceed 120 square inches (77 419
mm2). The aggregate area shall include all openings includ-
ing door undercuts, food passes and grilles. Openings shall
be not more than 36 inches (914 mm) above the floor. In
Occupancy Condition 5, the openings shall be closeable
from the room side.
408.8.4 Smoke-tight doors. Doors in openings in partitions
required to be smoke tight by Section 408.8 shall be sub-
stantial doors, of construction that will resist the passage of
smoke. Latches and door closures are not required on cell
doors.
408.9 Windowless buildings. For the purposes of this section,
a windowless building or portion of a building is one with
nonopenable windows, windows not readily breakable or with-
out windows. Windowless buildings shall be provided with an

engineered smoke control system to provide a tenable environ-
ment for exiting from the smoke compartment in the area of fire
origin in accordance with Section 909 for each windowless
smoke compartment.
[F] 408.10 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be
provided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.3.

SECTION 409
MOTION PICTURE PROJECTION ROOMS

409.1 General. The provisions of Sections 409.1 through
409.5 shall apply to rooms in which ribbon-type cellulose ace-
tate or other safety film is utilized in conjunction with electric
arc, xenon or other light-source projection equipment that
develops hazardous gases, dust or radiation. Where cellulose
nitrate film is utilized or stored, such rooms shall comply with
NFPA 40.
409.1.1 Projection room required. Every motion picture
machine projecting film as mentioned within the scope of
this section shall be enclosed in a projection room. Appurte-
nant electrical equipment, such as rheostats, transformers
and generators, shall be within the projection room or in an
adjacent room of equivalent construction.
409.2 Construction of projection rooms. Every projection
room shall be of permanent construction consistent with the
construction requirements for the type of building in which the
projection room is located. Openings are not required to be pro-
tected.
The room shall have a floor area of not less than 80 square
feet (7.44 m2) for a single machine and at least 40 square feet
(3.7 m2) for each additional machine. Each motion picture pro-
jector, floodlight, spotlight or similar piece of equipment shall
have a clear working space of not less than 30 inches by 30
inches (762 mm by 762 mm) on each side and at the rear
thereof, but only one such space shall be required between two
adjacent projectors. The projection room and the rooms appur-
tenant thereto shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6
inches (2286 mm). The aggregate of openings for projection
equipment shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the wall
between the projection room and the auditorium. Openings
shall be provided with glass or other approved material, so as to
close completely the opening.
409.3 Projection room and equipment ventilation. Ventila-
tion shall be provided in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code.
409.3.1 Supply air. Each projection room shall be provided
with adequate air supply inlets so arranged as to provide
well-distributed air throughout the room. Air inlet ducts
shall provide an amount of air equivalent to the amount of
air being exhausted by projection equipment. Air is permit-
ted to be taken from the outside; from adjacent spaces
within the building, provided the volume and infiltration
rate is sufficient; or from the building air-conditioning sys-
tem, provided it is so arranged as to provide sufficient air
when other systems are not in operation.
409.3.2 Exhaust air. Projection rooms are permitted to be
exhausted through the lamp exhaust system. The lamp

52

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:03 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

exhaust system shall be positively interconnected with the
lamp so that the lamp will not operate unless there is the
required airflow. Exhaust air ducts shall terminate at the
exterior of the building in such a location that the exhaust air
cannot be readily recirculated into any air supply system.
The projection room ventilation system is permitted to also
serve appurtenant rooms, such as the generator and rewind
rooms.
409.3.3 Projection machines. Each projection machine
shall be provided with an exhaust duct that will draw air
from each lamp and exhaust it directly to the outside of the
building. The lamp exhaust is permitted to serve to exhaust
air from the projection room to provide room air circulation.
Such ducts shall be of rigid materials, except for a flexible
connector approved for the purpose. The projection lamp or
projection room exhaust system, or both, is permitted to be
combined but shall not be interconnected with any other
exhaust or return system, or both, within the building.
409.4 Lighting control. Provisions shall be made for control
of the auditorium lighting and the means of egress lighting sys-
tems of theaters from inside the projection room and from at
least one other convenient point in the building.
409.5 Miscellaneous equipment. Each projection room shall
be provided with rewind and film storage facilities.

SECTION 410
STAGES AND PLATFORMS

410.1 Applicability. The provisions of Sections 410.1 through
410.7 shall apply to all parts of buildings and structures that
contain stages or platforms and similar appurtenances as herein
defined.
410.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
FLY GALLERY. A raised floor area above a stage from which
the movement of scenery and operation of other stage effects
are controlled.
GRIDIRON. The structural framing over a stage supporting
equipment for hanging or flying scenery and other stage
effects.
PINRAIL. A rail on or above a stage through which belaying
pins are inserted and to which lines are fastened.
PLATFORM. A raised area within a building used for wor-
ship, the presentation of music, plays or other entertainment;
the head table for special guests; the raised area for lecturers
and speakers; boxing and wrestling rings; theater-in-the-round
stages; and similar purposes wherein there are no overhead
hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than
lighting and sound. A temporary platform is one installed for
not more than 30 days.
PROSCENIUM WALL. The wall that separates the stage
from the auditorium or assembly seating area.
STAGE. A space within a building utilized for entertainment
or presentations, which includes overhead hanging curtains,
drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

410.3 Stages. Stage construction shall comply with Sections
410.3.1 through 410.3.7.
410.3.1 Stage construction. Stages shall be constructed of
materials as required for floors for the type of construction
of the building in which such stages are located.
Exceptions:
1. Stages of Type IIB or IV construction with a nomi-
nal 2-inch (51 mm) wood deck, provided that the
stage is separated from other areas in accordance
with Section 410.3.4.
2. In buildings of Types IIA, IIIA and VA construc-
tion, a fire-resistance-rated floor is not required,
provided the space below the stage is equipped
with an automatic fire-extinguishing system in
accordance with Section 903 or 904.
3. In all types of construction, the finished floor shall be
constructed of wood or approved noncombustible
materials. Openings through stage floors shall be
equipped with tight-fitting, solid wood trap doors
with approved safety locks.
410.3.1.1 Stage height and area. Stage areas shall be
measured to include the entire performance area and
adjacent backstage and support areas not separated from
the performance area by fire-resistance-rated construc-
tion. Stage height shall be measured from the lowest
point on the stage floor to the highest point of the roof or
floor deck above the stage.
410.3.2 Galleries, gridirons, catwalks and pinrails.
Beams designed only for the attachment of portable or fixed
theater equipment, gridirons, galleries and catwalks shall be
constructed of approved materials consistent with the
requirements for the type of construction of the building;
and a fire-resistance rating shall not be required. These
areas shall not be considered to be floors, stories, mezza-
nines or levels in applying this code.
Exception: Floors of fly galleries and catwalks shall be
constructed of any approved material.
410.3.3 Exterior stage doors. Where protection of open-
ings is required, exterior exit doors shall be protected with
fire door assemblies that comply with Section 715. Exterior
openings that are located on the stage for means of egress or
loading and unloading purposes, and that are likely to be
open during occupancy of the theater, shall be constructed
with vestibules to prevent air drafts into the auditorium.
410.3.4 Proscenium wall. Where the stage height is greater
than 50 feet (15 240 mm), all portions of the stage shall be
completely separated from the seating area by a proscenium
wall with not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating
extending continuously from the foundation to the roof.
410.3.5 Proscenium curtain. Where a proscenium wall is
required to have a fire-resistance rating, the stage opening
shall be provided with a fire curtain complying with NFPA
80 or an approved water curtain complying with Section
903.3.1.1 or, in facilities not utilizing the provisions of
smoke-protected assembly seating in accordance with Sec-
tion 1028.6.2, a smoke control system complying with Sec-

53

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:03 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

➡

tion 909 or natural ventilation designed to maintain the
smoke level at least 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor of the
means of egress.
410.3.6 Scenery. Combustible materials used in sets and
scenery shall meet the fire propagation performance criteria
of NFPA 701, in accordance with Section 806 and the Inter-
national Fire Code. Foam plastics and materials containing
foam plastics shall comply with Section 2603 and the Inter-
national Fire Code.
410.3.7 Stage ventilation. Emergency ventilation shall be
provided for stages larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in
floor area, or with a stage height greater than 50 feet (15 240
mm). Such ventilation shall comply with Section 410.3.7.1
or 410.3.7.2.
410.3.7.1 Roof vents. Two or more vents constructed to
open automatically by approved heat-activated devices
and with an aggregate clear opening area of not less than
5 percent of the area of the stage shall be located near the
center and above the highest part of the stage area. Sup-
plemental means shall be provided for manual operation
of the ventilator. Curbs shall be provided as required for
skylights in Section 2610.2. Vents shall be labeled.
[F] 410.3.7.2 Smoke control. Smoke control in accor-
dance with Section 909 shall be provided to maintain the
smoke layer interface not less than 6 feet (1829 mm)
above the highest level of the assembly seating or above
the top of the proscenium opening where a proscenium
wall is provided in compliance with Section 410.3.4.
410.4 Platform construction. Permanent platforms shall be
constructed of materials as required for the type of construction
of the building in which the permanent platform is located. Per-
manent platforms are permitted to be constructed of fire-retar-
dant-treated wood for Types I, II and IV construction where the
platforms are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the
main floor, and not more than one-third of the room floor area
and not more than 3,000 square feet (279 m2) in area. Where the
space beneath the permanent platform is used for storage or any
purpose other than equipment, wiring or plumbing, the floor
assembly shall not be less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction. Where the space beneath the permanent platform
is used only for equipment, wiring or plumbing, the underside
of the permanent platform need not be protected.
410.4.1 Temporary platforms. Platforms installed for a
period of not more than 30 days are permitted to be con-
structed of any materials permitted by the code. The space
between the floor and the platform above shall only be used
for plumbing and electrical wiring to platform equipment.
410.5 Dressing and appurtenant rooms. Dressing and appur-
tenant rooms shall comply with Sections 410.5.1 through
410.5.3.
410.5.1 Separation from stage. The stage shall be sepa-
rated from dressing rooms, scene docks, property rooms,
workshops, storerooms and compartments appurtenant to
the stage and other parts of the building by fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both. The minimum fire-resistance rating shall be 2 hours

for stage heights greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) and 1
hour for stage heights of 50 feet (15 240 mm) or less.
410.5.2 Separation from each other. Dressing rooms,
scene docks, property rooms, workshops, storerooms and
compartments appurtenant to the stage shall be separated
from each other by not less than 1-hour fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both.
410.5.3 Stage exits. At least one approved means of egress
shall be provided from each side of the stage and from each
side of the space under the stage. At least one means of
escape shall be provided from each fly gallery and from the
gridiron. A steel ladder, alternating tread device or spiral
stairway is permitted to be provided from the gridiron to a
scuttle in the stage roof.
[F] 410.6 Automatic sprinkler system. Stages shall be
equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system in
accordance with Chapter 9. Sprinklers shall be installed under
the roof and gridiron and under all catwalks and galleries over
the stage. Sprinklers shall be installed in dressing rooms, per-
former lounges, shops and storerooms accessory to such
stages.
Exceptions:
1. Sprinklers are not required under stage areas less than
4 feet (1219 mm) in clear height that are utilized
exclusively for storage of tables and chairs, provided
the concealed space is separated from the adjacent
spaces by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X
gypsum board.
2. Sprinklers are not required for stages 1,000 square
feet (93 m2) or less in area and 50 feet (15 240 mm) or
less in height where curtains, scenery or other com-
bustible hangings are not retractable vertically. Com-
bustible hangings shall be limited to a single main
curtain, borders, legs and a single backdrop.
3. Sprinklers are not required within portable orchestra
enclosures on stages.
[F] 410.7 Standpipes. Standpipe systems shall be provided in
accordance with Section 905.

SECTION 411
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS

411.1 General. Special amusement buildings having an occu-
pant load of 50 or more shall comply with the requirements for
the appropriate Group A occupancy and Sections 411.1
through 411.8. Amusement buildings having an occupant load
of less than 50 shall comply with the requirements for a Group
B occupancy and Sections 411.1 through 411.8 .
Exception: Amusement buildings or portions thereof that
are without walls or a roof and constructed to prevent the
accumulation of smoke.
For flammable decorative materials, see the International
Fire Code.

54

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:04 PM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

411.2 Definition. The following word and term shall, for the
purpose of this section and as used elsewhere in this code, have
the meaning shown herein.
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING. A special amuse-
ment building is any temporary or permanent building or por-
tion thereof that is occupied for amusement, entertainment or
educational purposes and that contains a device or system that
conveys passengers or provides a walkway along, around or
over a course in any direction so arranged that the means of
egress path is not readily apparent due to visual or audio dis-
tractions or is intentionally confounded or is not readily avail-
able because of the nature of the attraction or mode of
conveyance through the building or structure.
[F] 411.3 Automatic fire detection. Special amusement build-
ings shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system
in accordance with Section 907.
[F] 411.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Special amusement
buildings shall be equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where
the special amusement building is temporary, the sprinkler
water supply shall be of an approved temporary means.
Exception: Automatic sprinklers are not required where the
total floor area of a temporary special amusement building
is less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) and the travel distance
from any point to an exit is less than 50 feet (15 240 mm).
[F] 411.5 Alarm. Actuation of a single smoke detector, the
automatic sprinkler system or other automatic fire detection
device shall immediately sound an alarm at the building at a
constantly attended location from which emergency action can
be initiated including the capability of manual initiation of
requirements in Section 907.2.12.2 .
[F] 411.6 Emergency voice/alarm communications system.
An emergency voice/alarm communications system shall be
provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.12 and 907.5.2.2,
which is also permitted to serve as a public address system and
shall be audible throughout the entire special amusement
building.
411.7 Exit marking. Exit signs shall be installed at the
required exit or exit access doorways of amusement buildings
in accordance with this section and Section 1011. Approved
directional exit markings shall also be provided. Where mir-
rors, mazes or other designs are utilized that disguise the path
of egress travel such that they are not apparent, approved and
listed low-level exit signs that comply with Section 1011.4, and
directional path markings listed in accordance with UL 1994,
shall be provided and located not more than 8 inches (203 mm)
above the walking surface and on or near the path of egress
travel. Such markings shall become visible in an emergency.
The directional exit marking shall be activated by the automatic
fire detection system and the automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 907.2.12.2.
411.7.1 Photo luminescent exit signs. Where photo lumi-
nescent exit signs are installed, activating light source and
viewing distance shall be in accordance with the listing and
markings of the signs.
411.8 Interior finish. The interior finish shall be Class A in
accordance with Section 803.1.

SECTION 412
AIRCRAFT-RELATED OCCUPANCIES

412.1 General. Aircraft-related occupancies shall comply
with Sections 412.1 through 412.7 and the International Fire
Code.
412.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). A commercial business
granted the right by the airport sponsor to operate on an airport
and provide aeronautical services, such as fueling, hangaring,
tie-down and parking, aircraft rental, aircraft maintenance and
flight instruction.
HELIPORT. An area of land or water or a structural surface
that is used, or intended for the use, for the landing and taking
off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas that are used, or
intended for use, for heliport buildings or other heliport facili-
ties.
HELISTOP. The same as “heliport,” except that no fueling,
defueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is per-
mitted.
RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR. An accessory
building less than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) and 20 feet (6096
mm) in building height constructed on a one- or two-family
property where aircraft are stored. Such use will be considered
as a residential accessory use incidental to the dwelling.
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. Aircraft based at another location
and at the transient location for not more than 90 days.
412.3 Airport traffic control towers.
412.3.1 General. The provisions of Sections 412.3.1
through 412.3.6 shall apply to airport traffic control towers
not exceeding 1,500 square feet (140 m2) per floor occupied
only for the following uses:
1. Airport traffic control cab.
2. Electrical and mechanical equipment rooms.
3. Airport terminal radar and electronics rooms.
4. Office spaces incidental to the tower operation.
5. Lounges for employees, including sanitary facilities.
412.3.2 Type of construction. Airport traffic control tow-
ers shall be constructed to comply with the height and area
limitations of Table 412.3.2.

TABLE 412.3.2
HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS FOR AIRPORT
TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWERS

TYPE OF
CONSTRUCTION

IA
IB
IIA
IIB
IIIA

HEIGHTa
(feet)

Unlimited
240
100
85
65

MAXIMUM AREA
(square feet)

1,500
1,500
1,500
1,500
1,500

For SI:
1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. Height to be measured from grade plane to cab floor.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

55

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:04 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

412.3.3 Egress. A minimum of one exit stairway shall be
permitted for airport traffic control towers of any height pro-
vided that the occupant load per floor does not exceed 15.
The stairway shall conform to the requirements of Section
1009. The stairway shall be separated from elevators by a
minimum distance of one-half of the diagonal of the area
served measured in a straight line. The exit stairway and ele-
vator hoistway are permitted to be located in the same shaft
enclosure, provided they are separated from each other by a
4-hour fire barrier having no openings. Such stairway shall
be pressurized to a minimum of 0.15 inch of water column
(43 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inch of water column (101
Pa) in the shaft relative to the building with stairway doors
closed. Stairways need not extend to the roof as specified in
Section 1009.11. The provisions of Section 403 do not
apply.
Exception: Smokeproof enclosures as set forth in Sec-
tion 1022.9 are not required where required stairways
are pressurized.
[F] 412.3.4 Automatic fire detection systems. Airport traf-
fic control towers shall be provided with an automatic fire
detection system installed in accordance with Section
907.2.
[F] 412.3.5 Standby power. A standby power system that
conforms to Chapter 27 shall be provided in airport traffic
control towers more than 65 feet (19 812 mm) in height.
Power shall be provided to the following equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and
lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
412.3.6 Accessibility. Airport traffic control towers need not
be accessible as specified in the provisions of Chapter 11.
412.4 Aircraft hangars. Aircraft hangars shall be in accor-
dance with Sections 412.4.1 through 412.4.6.
412.4.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls located less than 30
feet (9144 mm) from lot lines or a public way shall have a
fire-resistance rating not less than 2 hours.
412.4.2 Basements. Where hangars have basements, floors
over basements shall be of Type IA construction and shall be
made tight against seepage of water, oil or vapors. There
shall be no opening or communication between basements
and the hangar. Access to basements shall be from outside
only.
412.4.3 Floor surface. Floors shall be graded and drained
to prevent water or fuel from remaining on the floor. Floor
drains shall discharge through an oil separator to the sewer
or to an outside vented sump.
Exception: Aircraft hangars with individual lease
spaces not exceeding 2,000 square feet (186 m2) each in
which servicing, repairing or washing is not conducted
and fuel is not dispensed shall have floors that are graded
toward the door, but shall not require a separator.

412.4.4 Heating equipment. Heating equipment shall be
placed in another room separated by 2-hour fire barriers
constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal
assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both. Entrance shall be from the outside or by means of a
vestibule providing a two-doorway separation.
Exceptions:
1. Unit heaters and vented infrared radiant heating
equipment suspended at least 10 feet (3048 mm)
above the upper surface of wings or engine enclo-
sures of the highest aircraft that are permitted to be
housed in the hangar and at least 8 feet (2438 mm)
above the floor in shops, offices and other sections
of the hangar communicating with storage or ser-
vice areas.
2. A single interior door shall be allowed, provided
the sources of ignition in the appliances are at least
18 inches (457 mm) above the floor.
412.4.5 Finishing. The process of “doping,” involving use
of a volatile flammable solvent, or of painting, shall be car-
ried on in a separate detached building equipped with auto-
matic fire-extinguishing equipment
in accordance with
Section 903.
412.4.6 Fire suppression. Aircraft hangars shall be pro-
vided with a fire suppression system designed in accordance
with NFPA 409, based upon the classification for the hangar
given in Table 412.4.6.
Exception: When a fixed base operator has separate
repair facilities on site, Group II hangars operated by a
fixed base operator used for storage of transient aircraft
only shall have a fire suppression system, but the system
is exempt from foam requirements.
412.4.6.1 Hazardous operations. Any Group III air-
craft hangar according to Table 412.4.6 that contains
hazardous operations including, but not limited to, the
following shall be provided with a Group I or II fire sup-
pression system in accordance with NFPA 409 as appli-
cable:
1. Doping.
2. Hot work including, but not limited to, welding,
torch cutting and torch soldering.
3. Fuel transfer.
4. Fuel tank repair or maintenance not including
defueled tanks in accordance with NFPA 409,
inerted tanks or tanks that have never been fueled.
5. Spray finishing operations.
6. Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the
unsprinklered single fire area in excess of 1,600
gallons (6057 L).
7. Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the maxi-
mum single fire area in excess of 7,500 gallons
(28 390 L) for a hangar with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

56

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:05 PM

20

412.4.6.2 Separation of maximum single fire areas. Max-
imum single fire areas established in accordance with han-
gar classification and construction type in Table 412.4.6
shall be separated by 2-hour fire walls constructed in accor-
dance with Section 706.
412.5 Residential aircraft hangars. Residential aircraft han-
gars as defined in Section 412.2 shall comply with Sections
412.5.1 through 412.5.2.
412.5.1 Fire separation. A hangar shall not be attached to a
dwelling unless separated by a fire barrier having a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Such separa-
tion shall be continuous from the foundation to the under-
side of the roof and unpierced except for doors leading to the
dwelling unit. Doors into the dwelling unit must be
equipped with self-closing devices and conform to the
requirements of Section 715 with at least a 4-inch (102 mm)
noncombustible raised sill. Openings from a hanger directly
into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permit-
ted.
412.5.2 Egress. A hangar shall provide two means of egress.
One of the doors into the dwelling shall be considered as
meeting only one of the two means of egress.
[F] 412.5.3 Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be pro-
vided within the hangar in accordance with Section
907.2.21.
412.5.4 Independent systems. Electrical, mechanical and
plumbing drain, waste and vent (DWV) systems installed
within the hangar shall be independent of the systems
installed within the dwelling. Building sewer lines shall be
permitted to be connected outside the structures.
Exception: Smoke detector wiring and feed for electri-
cal subpanels in the hangar.

412.5.5 Height and area limits. Residential aircraft han-
gars shall not exceed 2,000 square feet (186 m2) in area and
20 feet (6096 mm) in building height.
[F] 412.6 Aircraft paint hangars. Aircraft painting opera-
tions where flammable liquids are used in excess of the maxi-
mum allowable quantities per control area listed in Table
307.7(1) shall be conducted in an aircraft paint hangar that
complies with the provisions of Sections 412.6.1 through
412.6.6.
[F] 412.6.1 Occupancy group. Aircraft paint hangars shall
be classified as Group H-2. Aircraft paint hangars shall
comply with the applicable requirements of this code and
the International Fire Code for such occupancy.
412.6.2 Construction. The aircraft paint hangar shall be of
Type I or II construction.
[F] 412.6.3 Operations. Only those flammable liquids nec-
essary for painting operations shall be permitted in quantities
less than the maximum allowable quantities per control area
in Table 307.1(1). Spray equipment cleaning operations shall
be conducted in a liquid use, dispensing and mixing room.
[F] 412.6.4 Storage. Storage of flammable liquids shall be
in a liquid storage room.
[F] 412.6.5 Fire suppression. Aircraft paint hangars shall
be provided with fire suppression as required by NFPA 409.
412.6.6 Ventilation. Aircraft paint hangars shall be pro-
vided with ventilation as required in the International
Mechanical Code.

412.7 Heliports and helistops. Heliports and helistops shall
be permitted to be erected on buildings or other locations where
they are constructed in accordance with Sections 412.7.1
through 412.7.4 .

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

57

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 412.4.6
HANGAR FIRE SUPPRESSION REQUIREMENTSa, b, c

MAXIMUM SINGLE
FIRE AREA, SQ. FT.

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

> 40,001

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

Group I

40,000

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

30,000

Group III

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

20,000

Group III

Group III

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

Group II

15,000

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group II

Group III

Group II

Group III

Group II

Group II

12,000

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group II

Group II

8,000

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group II

5,000

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

Group III

For SI:
1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. Aircraft hangars with a door height greater than 28 feet shall be provided with fire suppression for a Group I hangar regardless of maximum fire area.
b. Groups shall be as classified in accordance with NFPA 409.
c. Membrane structures complying with Section 3102 shall be classified as a Group IV hangar.

21

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:06 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

412.7.1 Size. The landing area for helicopters less than
3,500 pounds (1588 kg) shall be a minimum of 20 feet (6096
mm) in length and width. The landing area shall be sur-
rounded on all sides by a clear area having a minimum aver-
age width at roof level of 15 feet (4572 mm) but with no
width less than 5 feet (1524 mm).
412.7.2 Design. Helicopter landing areas and the supports
thereof on the roof of a building shall be noncombustible
construction. Landing areas shall be designed to confine any
flammable liquid spillage to the landing area itself and pro-
visions shall be made to drain such spillage away from any
exit or stairway serving the helicopter landing area or from a
structure housing such exit or stairway. For structural
design requirements, see Section 1605.4.
412.7.3 Means of egress. The means of egress from heli-
ports and helistops shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 10. Landing areas located on buildings or structures
shall have two or more means of egress. For landing areas
less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in length or less than 2,000
square feet (186 m2) in area, the second means of egress is
permitted to be a fire escape, alternating tread device or lad-
der leading to the floor below.
412.7.4 Rooftop heliports and helistops. Rooftop heli-
ports and helistops shall comply with NFPA 418.

SECTION 413
COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE

413.1 General. High-piled stock or rack storage in any occu-
pancy group shall comply with the International Fire Code.
413 .2 Attic , under-floor and concealed spaces . Attic,
under-floor and concealed spaces used for storage of combusti-
ble materials shall be protected on the storage side as required
for 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Openings shall
be protected by assemblies that are self-closing and are of
noncombustible construction or solid wood core not less than
13/4 inch (45 mm) in thickness.
Exceptions:

1. Areas protected by approved automatic sprinkler sys-
tems.
2. Group R-3 and U occupancies.

SECTION 414
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

[F] 414.1 General. The provisions of Sections 414.1 through
414.7 shall apply to buildings and structures occupied for the
manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of haz-
ardous materials.
[F] 414.1.1 Other provisions. Buildings and structures
with an occupancy in Group H shall also comply with the
applicable provisions of Section 415 and the International
Fire Code.
[F] 414.1.2 Materials. The safe design of hazardous mate-
rial occupancies is material dependent. Individual material
requirements are also found in Sections 307 and 415, and in

58

the International Mechanical Code and the International
Fire Code.

[F] 414.1.2.1 Aerosols. Level 2 and 3 aerosol products
shall be stored and displayed in accordance with the
International Fire Code. See Section 311.2 and the Inter-
national Fire Code for occupancy group requirements.

[F] 414.1.3 Information required. A report shall be sub-
mitted to the building official identifying the maximum
expected quantities of hazardous materials to be stored,
used in a closed system and used in an open system, and sub-
divided to separately address hazardous material classifica-
tion categories based on Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). The
methods of protection from such hazards, including but not
limited to control areas, fire protection systems and Group
H occupancies shall be indicated in the report and on the
construction documents. The opinion and report shall be
prepared by a qualified person,
firm or corporation
approved by the building official and provided without
charge to the enforcing agency.

For buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group
H, separate floor plans shall be submitted identifying the
locations of anticipated contents and processes so as to
reflect the nature of each occupied portion of every building
and structure.

[F] 414.2 Control areas. Control areas shall comply with Sec-
tions 414.2.1 through 414.2.5 and the International Fire Code.

414.2.1 Construction requirements. Control areas shall
be separated from each other by fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both.

[F] 414.2.2 Percentage of maximum allowable quanti-
ties. The percentage of maximum allowable quantities of
hazardous materials per control area permitted at each floor
level within a building shall be in accordance with Table
414.2.2.

[F] 414.2.3 Number. The maximum number of control
areas within a building shall be in accordance with Table
414.2.2.

414.2.4 Fire-resistance-rating requirements. The re-

quired fire-resistance rating for fire barriers shall be in
accordance with Table 414.2.2. The floor assembly of the
control area and the construction supporting the floor of the
control area shall have a minimum 2-hour fire-resistance
rating.

Exception: The floor assembly of the control area and
the construction supporting the floor of the control area
are allowed to be 1-hour fire-resistance rated in buildings
of Types IIA, IIIA and VA construction, provided that
both of the following conditions exist:

1. The building is equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1; and
2. The building is three stories or less above grade
plane.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:06 PM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 414.2.2
DESIGN AND NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS

FLOOR LEVEL

PERCENTAGE OF THE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE
QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREAa

NUMBER OF CONTROL
AREAS PER FLOOR

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING
FOR FIRE BARRIERS IN HOURSb

Higher than 9
7-9
6
5
4
3
2
1

1
2
Lower than 2

Above grade
plane

Below grade
plane

5
5
12.5
12.5
12.5
50
75
100

1
2
2
2
2
2
3
4

2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1

75
50
Not Allowed

3
2
Not Allowed

1
1
Not Allowed

a. Percentages shall be of the maximum allowable quantity per control area shown in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2), with all increases allowed in the notes to those
tables.
b. Fire barriers shall include walls and floors as necessary to provide separation from other portions of the building.

[F] 414.2.5 Hazardous material in Group M display and
storage areas and in Group S storage areas. The aggre-
gate quantity of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or
noncombustible liquid hazardous materials permitted
within a single control area of a Group M display and stor-
age area, a Group S storage area or an outdoor control area
is permitted to exceed the maximum allowable quantities
per control area specified in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2)
without classifying the building or use as a Group H occu-
pancy, provided that the materials are displayed and stored
in accordance with the International Fire Code and quanti-
ties do not exceed the maximum allowable specified in
Table 414.2.5(1).

In Group M occupancy wholesale and retail sales uses,
indoor storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall
not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control
area as indicated in Table 414.2.5(2), provided that the
materials are displayed and stored in accordance with the
International Fire Code.

The maximum quantity of aerosol products in Group M
occupancy retail display areas, storage areas adjacent to
retail display areas and retail storage areas shall be in accor-
dance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 414.3 Ventilation. Rooms, areas or spaces of Group H in
wh ich exp los ive , corros ive , combus t ib le , f lammab le or
highly toxic dusts, mists, fumes, vapors or gases are or may be
emitted due to the processing, use, handling or storage of
materials shall be mechanically ventilated as required by the
International Fire Code and the International Mechanical
Code.

Ducts conveying explosives or flammable vapors, fumes or
dusts shall extend directly to the exterior of the building with-
out entering other spaces. Exhaust ducts shall not extend into or
through ducts and plenums.

Exception: Ducts conveying vapor or fumes having flam-
mable constituents less than 25 percent of their lower flam-
mable limit (LFL) are permitted to pass through other
spaces.

Emissions generated at workstations shall be confined to the
area in which they are generated as specified in the Interna-
tional Fire Code and the International Mechanical Code.
The location of supply and exhaust openings shall be in
accordance with the International Mechanical Code. Exhaust
air contaminated by highly toxic material shall be treated in
accordance with the International Fire Code.
A manual shutoff control for ventilation equipment required
by this section shall be provided outside the room adjacent to
the principal access door to the room. The switch shall be of the
break-glass type and shall be labeled: VENTILATION SYS-
TEM EMERGENCY SHUTOFF.
[F] 414.4 Hazardous material systems. Systems involving
hazardous materials shall be suitable for the intended applica-
tion. Controls shall be designed to prevent materials from
entering or leaving process or reaction systems at other than the
intended time, rate or path. Automatic controls, where pro-
vided, shall be designed to be fail safe.
[F] 414.5 Inside storage, dispensing and use. The inside stor-
age, dispensing and use of hazardous materials in excess of the
maximum allowable quantities per control area of Tables
307.1(1) and 307.1(2) shall be in accordance with Sections
414.5.1 through 414.5.5 of this code and the International Fire
Code.

[F] 414.5.1 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be
provided in accordance with the International Fire Code as
required by Table 414.5.1 where quantities of hazardous
materials specified in that table exceed the maximum allow-
able quantities in Table 307.1(1) or where a structure, room
or space is occupied for purposes involving explosion haz-
ards as required by Section 415 or the International Fire
Code.

[F] 414.5.2 Monitor control equipment. Monitor control
equipment shall be provided where required by the Interna-
tional Fire Code.

[F] 414.5.3 Automatic fire detection systems. Group H
occupancies shall be provided with an automatic fire detec-
tion system in accordance with Section 907.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

59

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:07 PM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 414.2.5(1)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER INDOOR AND OUTDOOR CONTROL AREA IN GROUP M AND S OCCUPANCIES
NONFLAMMABLE SOLIDS AND NONFLAMMABLE AND NONCOMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS d, e, f

CONDITION

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA

Materiala

Class

Solids
pounds

20b, c

Liquids
gallons

975

2b, c

100

Not Allowed
115
225
1,800i, j
Not Allowed
55
115
Not Limited
55
115
Not Limited

1. Oxidizersb, c

A. Health-hazard materials—nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids
1. Corrosivesb, c
Not Applicable
9,750
2. Highly toxics
Not Applicable
3. Toxicsb, c
Not Applicable
1,000
B. Physical-hazard materials—nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids
4
Not Allowed
3
1,150g
2
2,250h
1
18,000i, j
4
Not Allowed
3
550
2
1,150
1
Not Limited
550
1,150
Not Limited

2. Unstable (reactives)b, c

3. Water (reactives)

3b, c
2b, c

1

For SI: 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.
a. Hazard categories are as specified in the International Fire Code.
b. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings that are sprinklered in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. When Note c also applies, the
increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.
c. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, in accordance with the International Fire Code. When
Note b also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.
d. See Table 414.2.2 for design and number of control areas.
e. Allowable quantities for other hazardous material categories shall be in accordance with Section 307.
f. Maximum quantities shall be increased 100 percent in outdoor control areas.
g. Maximum amounts are permitted to be increased to 2,250 pounds when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or
packager and do not exceed 10 pounds each.
h. Maximum amounts are permitted to be increased to 4,500 pounds when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or
packager and do not exceed 10 pounds each.
i. The permitted quantities shall not be limited in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
j. Quantities are unlimited in an outdoor control area.

TABLE [F] 414.2.5(2)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
IN WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SALES OCCUPANCIES PER CONTROL AREAa

TYPE OF LIQUID

Class IA
Class IB, IC, II and IIIA
Class IIIB

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA (gallons)

Sprinklered in accordance with note b
densities and arrangements

Sprinklered in accordance with Tables
3404.3.6.3(4) through 3404.3.6.3(8) and Table
3404.3.7.5.1 of the International Fire Code

60
7,500c
Unlimited

60
15,000c
Unlimited

Nonsprinklered

30
1,600
13,200

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 gallon per minute per square foot = 40.75 L/min/m2.
a. Control areas shall be separated from each other by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier wall.
b. To be considered as sprinklered, a building shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system with a design providing minimum densities
as follows:
1. For uncartoned commodities on shelves 6 feet or less in height where the ceiling height does not exceed 18 feet, quantities are those permitted with a mini-
mum sprinkler design density of Ordinary Hazard Group 2.
2. For cartoned, palletized or racked commodities where storage is 4 feet 6 inches or less in height and where the ceiling height does not exceed 18 feet, quanti-
ties are those permitted with a minimum sprinkler design density of 0.21 gallon per minute per square foot over the most remote 1,500-square-foot area.
c. Where wholesale and retail sales or storage areas exceed 50,000 square feet in area, the maximum allowable quantities are allowed to be increased by 2 percent for
each 1,000 square feet of area in excess of 50,000 square feet, up to a maximum of 100 percent of the table amounts. A control area separation is not required. The
cumulative amounts, including amounts attained by having an additional control area, shall not exceed 30,000 gallons.

60

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009pg60.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:21:07 AM

24

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 414.5.1
EXPLOSION CONTROL REQUIREMENTSa

EXPLOSION CONTROL METHODS

MATERIAL

CLASS

Barricade construction

Explosion (deflagration) venting
or explosion (deflagration)
prevention systemsb

HAZARD CATEGORY

Combustible dustsc

Cryogenic flammables

Explosives

Flammable gas

Flammable liquid

Organic peroxides

Oxidizer liquids and solids

Pyrophoric gas

Unstable (reactive)

Water-reactive liquids and solids

SPECIAL USES

Acetylene generator rooms

Grain processing

Liquefied petroleum gas-distribution facilities

Where explosion hazards existf

—

—

Division 1.1
Division 1.2
Division 1.3
Division 1.4
Division 1.5
Division 1.6

Gaseous
Liquefied

IAd
IBe

U
I

4

—

4
3 Detonable
3 Nondetonable

3
2g

—

—

—

Detonation
Deflagration

Not Required

Not Required

Required
Required
Not Required
Not Required
Required
Required

Not Required
Not Required

Not Required
Not Required

Required
Required

Required

Not Required

Required
Required
Not Required

Not Required
Not Required

Not Required

Not Required

Not Required

Required
Not Required

Required

Required

Not Required
Not Required
Required
Required
Not Required
Not Required

Required
Required

Required
Required

Not Permitted
Not Permitted

Not Permitted

Required

Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Required

Required
Required

Required

Required

Required

Not Permitted
Required

a. See Section 414.1.3.
b. See the International Fire Code.
c. As generated during manufacturing or processing. See definition of “Combustible dust” in Chapter 3.
d. Storage or use.
e. In open use or dispensing.
f. Rooms containing dispensing and use of hazardous materials when an explosive environment can occur because of the characteristics or nature of the hazardous
materials or as a result of the dispensing or use process.
g. A method of explosion control shall be provided when Class 2 water-reactive materials can form potentially explosive mixtures.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

61

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:07 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] 414.5.4 Standby or emergency power. Where mechan-
ical ventilation, treatment systems, temperature control,
alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems are
required, such systems shall be provided with an emergency
or standby power system in accordance with Chapter 27.
Exceptions:
1. Mechanical ventilation for storage of Class IB and
Class IC flammable and combustible liquids in
closed containers not exceeding 6.5 gallons (25 L)
capacity.
2. Storage areas for Class 1 and 2 oxidizers.
3. Storage areas for Class II, III, IV and V organic
peroxides.
4. Storage, use and handling areas for asphyxiant,
irritant and radioactive gases.
5. For storage, use and handling areas for highly toxic
or toxic materials, see Sections 3704.2.2.8 and
3704.3.4.2 of the International Fire Code.
6. Standby power for mechanical ventilation, treat-
ment systems and temperature control systems
shall not be required where an approved fail-safe
engineered system is installed.
[F] 414.5.5 Spill control, drainage and containment.
Rooms, buildings or areas occupied for the storage of solid
and liquid hazardous materials shall be provided with a
means to control spillage and to contain or drain off spillage
and fire protection water discharged in the storage area
where required in the International Fire Code. The methods
of spill control shall be in accordance with the International
Fire Code.

[F] 414.6 Outdoor storage, dispensing and use. The outdoor
storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials shall be in
accordance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 414.6.1 Weather protection. Where weather protection
is provided for sheltering outdoor hazardous material stor-
age or use areas, such areas shall be considered outdoor
storage or use when the weather protection structure com-
plies with Sections 414.6.1.1 through 414.6.1.3.
[F] 414.6.1.1 Walls. Walls shall not obstruct more than
one side of the structure.
Exception: Walls shall be permitted to obstruct por-
tions of multiple sides of the structure, provided that
the obstructed area does not exceed 25 percent of the
structure’s perimeter.
[F] 414.6.1.2 Separation distance. The distance from
the structure to buildings, lot lines, public ways or means
of egress to a public way shall not be less than the dis-
tance required for an outside hazardous material storage
or use area without weather protection.
[F] 414.6.1.3 Noncombustible construction. The overhead
structure shall be of approved noncombustible construction
with a maximum area of 1,500 square feet (140 m2).
Exception: The increases permitted by Section 506
apply.

[F] 414.7 Emergency alarms. Emergency alarms for the
detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group
H occupancies shall be provided as set forth herein.
[F] 414.7.1 Storage. An approved manual emergency
alarm system shall be provided in buildings, rooms or areas
used for storage of hazardous materials. Emergency
alarm-initiating devices shall be installed outside of each
interior exit or exit access door of storage buildings, rooms
or areas. Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device
shall sound a local alarm to alert occupants of an emergency
situation involving hazardous materials.
[F] 414.7.2 Dispensing, use and handling. Where hazard-
ous materials having a hazard ranking of 3 or 4 in accor-
dance with NFPA 704 are transported through corridors or
exit enclosures, there shall be an emergency telephone sys-
tem, a local manual alarm station or an approved alarm-ini-
tiating device at not more than 150-foot (45 720 mm)
intervals and at each exit and exit access doorway through-
out the transport route. The signal shall be relayed to an
approved central, proprietary or remote station service or
constantly attended on-site location and shall also initiate a
local audible alarm.
[F] 414.7.3 Supervision. Emergency alarm systems shall
be supervised by an approved central, proprietary or remote
station service or shall initiate an audible and visual signal at
a constantly attended on-site location.

SECTION 415
GROUPS H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 AND H-5

[F] 415.1 Scope. The provisions of Sections 415.1 through
415.8 shall apply to the storage and use of hazardous materials
in excess of the maximum allowable quantities per control area
listed in Section 307.1. Buildings and structures with an occu-
pancy in Group H shall also comply with the applicable provi-
sions of Section 414 and the International Fire Code.
[F] 415.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in the
code, have the meanings shown herein.
[F] CONTINUOUS GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. A gas
detection system where the analytical instrument is maintained
in continuous operation and sampling is performed without
interruption. Analysis is allowed to be performed on a cyclical
basis at intervals not to exceed 30 minutes.
[F] DETACHED BUILDING. A separate single-story build-
ing, without a basement or crawl space, used for the storage or
use of hazardous materials and located an approved distance
from all structures.
[F] EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION. An approved
location on the premises where signals from emergency equip-
ment are received and which is staffed by trained personnel.
[F] EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE. An appliance or piece of
equipment that consists of a top, a back and two sides providing
a means of local exhaust for capturing gases, fumes, vapors and
mists. Such enclosures include laboratory hoods, exhaust fume
hoods and similar appliances and equipment used to locally
retain and exhaust the gases, fumes, vapors and mists that could

62

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:08 PM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

be released. Rooms or areas provided with general ventilation,
in themselves, are not exhausted enclosures.
[F] FABRICATION AREA. An area within a semiconductor
fabrication facility and related research and development areas
in which there are processes using hazardous production mate-
rials. Such areas are allowed to include ancillary rooms or areas
such as dressing rooms and offices that are directly related to
the fabrication area processes.
[F] FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES. The concentra-
tion of flammable constituents in air that exceed 25 percent of
their lower flammable limit (LFL).
[F] GAS CABINET. A fully enclosed, noncombustible enclo-
sure used to provide an isolated environment for compressed
gas cylinders in storage or use. Doors and access ports for
exchanging cylinders and accessing pressure-regulating con-
trols are allowed to be included.
[F] GAS ROOM. A separately ventilated, fully enclosed room
in which only compressed gases and associated equipment and
supplies are stored or used.
[F] HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION MATERIAL (HPM).
A solid, liquid or gas associated with semiconductor manufac-
t u r i n g t h a t h a s a d eg r e e - o f - h a z a r d r a t i n g i n h e a l t h ,
flammability or instability of Class 3 or 4 as ranked by NFPA
704 and which is used directly in research, laboratory or pro-
duction processes which have as their end product materials
that are not hazardous.
[F] HPM FLAMMABLE LIQUID. An HPM liquid that is
defined as either a Class I flammable liquid or a Class II or
Class IIIA combustible liquid.
[F] HPM ROOM. A room used in conjunction with or serving
a Group H-5 occupancy, where HPM is stored or used and
which is classified as a Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancy.
[F ] IMMED IATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND
HEALTH (IDLH). The concentration of air-borne contami-
nants which poses a threat of death, immediate or delayed per-
manent adverse health effects, or effects that could prevent
escape from such an environment. This contaminant concentra-
tion level is established by the National Institute of Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) based on both toxicity and
flammability. It generally is expressed in parts per million by
volume (ppm v/v) or milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3). If ade-
quate data do not exist for precise establishment of IDLH con-
centrations, an independent certified industrial hygienist,
industrial toxicologist, appropriate regulatory agency or other
source approved by the building official shall make such
determination.
[F] LIQUID. A material that has a melting point that is equal to
or less than 68°F (20°C) and a boiling point that is greater than
68°F (20°C) at 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute (psia)
(101 kPa). When not otherwise identified, the term “liquid”
includes both flammable and combustible liquids.
[F] LIQUID STORAGE ROOM. A room classified as a
Group H-3 occupancy used for the storage of flammable or
combustible liquids in a closed condition.

[F] LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM.
A room in which Class I, II and IIIA flammable or combustible
liquids are used, dispensed or mixed in open containers.
[F] LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL). The minimum
concentration of vapor in air at which propagation of flame will
occur in the presence of an ignition source. The LFL is some-
times referred to as “LEL” or “lower explosive limit.”
[F ] NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRE S SURE
(NTP). A temperature of 70°F (21°C) and a pressure of 1 atmo-
sphere [14.7 psia (101 kPa)].
[ F ] PHY S IOLOG ICAL WARN ING THRE SHOLD
LEVEL. A concentration of air-borne contaminants, normally
expressed in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per cubic meter
(mg/m3), that represents the concentration at which persons can
sense the presence of the contaminant due to odor, irritation or
other quick-acting physiological response. When used in
conjunction with the permissible exposure limit (PEL) the physio-
logical warning threshold levels are those consistent with the classi-
fication system used to establish the PEL. See the definition of
“Permissible exposure limit (PEL)” in the International Fire Code.
[F] SERVICE CORRIDOR. A fully enclosed passage used
for transporting HPM and purposes other than required means
of egress.
[F] SOLID. A material that has a melting point, decomposes or
sublimes at a temperature greater than 68°F (20°C).
[F] STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
1. The keeping, retention or leaving of hazardous materials
in closed containers, tanks, cylinders or similar vessels, or
2. Vessels supplying operations through closed connec-
tions to the vessel.
[F] USE (MATERIAL). Placing a material into action, includ-
ing solids, liquids and gases.
[F] WORKSTATION. A defined space or an independent prin-
cipal piece of equipment using HPM within a fabrication area
where a specific function, laboratory procedure or research
activity occurs. Approved or listed hazardous materials storage
cabinets, flammable liquid storage cabinets or gas cabinets serv-
ing a workstation are included as part of the workstation. A
workstation is allowed to contain ventilation equipment, fire
protection devices, detection devices, electrical devices and
other processing and scientific equipment.
[F] 415.3 Fire separation distance. Group H occupancies
shall be located on property in accordance with the other provi-
sions of this chapter. In Groups H-2 and H-3, not less than 25
percent of the perimeter wall of the occupancy shall be an exte-
rior wall.

Exceptions:
1. Liquid use, dispensing and mixing rooms having a
floor area of not more than 500 square feet (46.5 m2)
need not be located on the outer perimeter of the
building where they are in accordance with the Inter-
national Fire Code and NFPA 30.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

63

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:09 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

2. Liquid storage rooms having a floor area of not more
than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) need not be located on
the outer perimeter where they are in accordance with
the International Fire Code and NFPA 30.
3. Spray paint booths that comply with the International
Fire Code need not be located on the outer perimeter.
[F] 415.3.1 Group H occupancy minimum fire separa-
tion distance. Regardless of any other provisions, buildings
containing Group H occupancies shall be set back to the
minimum fire separation distance as set forth in Items 1
through 4 below. Distances shall be measured from the
walls enclosing the occupancy to lot lines, including those
on a public way. Distances to assumed lot lines established
for the purpose of determining exterior wall and opening
protection are not to be used to establish the minimum fire
separation distance for buildings on sites where explosives
are manufactured or used when separation is provided in
accordance with the quantity distance tables specified for
explosive materials in the International Fire Code.
1. Group H-1. Not less than 75 feet (22 860 mm) and not
less than required by the International Fire Code.
Exceptions:
1. Fireworks manufacturing buildings sepa-
rated in accordance with NFPA 1124.
2. Buildings containing the following materi-
als when separated in accordance with Table
415.3.1:
2.1. O rgan ic p e rox id e s , un c la s s i f ied
detonable.
2.2. Unstable reactive materials, Class 4.
2.3. Unstable reactive materials, Class 3
detonable.
2.4. Detonable pyrophoric materials.
2. Group H-2. Not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) where
the area of the occupancy exceeds 1,000 square feet
(93 m2) and it is not required to be located in a
detached building.
3. Groups H-2 and H-3. Not less than 50 feet (15 240
mm) where a detached building is required (see Table
415.3.2).
4. Groups H-2 and H-3. Occupancies containing materi-
als with explosive characteristics shall be separated as
required by the International Fire Code. Where sepa-
rations are not specified, the distances required shall
not be less than the distances required by Table
415.3.1.
[F] 415.3.2 Detached buildings for Group H-1, H-2 or
H-3 occupancy. The storage of hazardous materials in
excess of those amounts listed in Table 415.3.2 shall be in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 415.4
and 415.5. Where a detached building is required by Table
415.3.2, there are no requirements for wall and opening pro-
tection based on fire separation distance.

[F] 415.4 Special provisions for Group H-1 occupancies.
Group H-1 occupancies shall be in buildings used for no other

64

purpose, shall not exceed one story in height and be without
basements, crawl spaces or other under-floor spaces. Roofs
shall be of lightweight construction with suitable thermal insu-
lation to prevent sensitive material from reaching its decompo-
s i t ion tempe ra tu re . G roup H -1 occupanc ies con ta in ing
materials that are in themselves both physical and health haz-
ards in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities
per control area in Table 307.1.(2) shall comply with require-
ments for both Group H-1 and H-4 occupancies.
[F] 415.4.1 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage
areas for organic peroxides, pyrophoric materials and unsta-
ble (reactive) materials shall be of liquid-tight, noncombust-
ible construction.
[F] 415.5 Special provisions for Groups H-2 and H-3 occu-
pancies. Groups H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing quanti-
ties of hazardous materials in excess of those set forth in Table
415.3.2 shall be in buildings used for no other purpose, shall
not exceed one story in height and shall be without basements,
crawl spaces or other under-floor spaces.
Groups H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing water-reactive
materials shall be resistant to water penetration. Piping for con-
veying liquids shall not be over or through areas containing
water reactives, unless isolated by approved liquid-tight con-
struction.
Exception: Fire protection piping.
[F] 415.5.1 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage
areas for organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophoric materi-
als, unstable (reactive) materials and water-reactive solids
and liquids shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible con-
struction.
[F] 415.5.2 Waterproof room. Rooms or areas used for the
storage of water-reactive solids and liquids shall be con-
structed in a manner that resists the penetration of water
through the use of waterproof materials. Piping carrying
water for other than approved automatic fire sprinkler sys-
tems shall not be within such rooms or areas.
[F] 415.6 Group H-2. Occupancies in Group H-2 shall be con-
structed in accordance with Sections 415.6.1 through 415.6.4
and the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.1 Combustible dusts, grain processing and
storage. The provisions of Sections 415.6.1.1 through
415.6.1.6 shall apply to buildings in which materials that
produce combustible dusts are stored or handled. Buildings
that store or handle combustible dusts shall comply with the
applicable provisions of NFPA 61, NFPA 85, NFPA 120,
NFPA 484, NFPA 654, NFPA 655 and NFPA 664, and the
International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.1.1 Type of construction and height excep-
tions. Buildings shall be constructed in compliance with
the height and area limitations of Table 503 for Group
H-2; except that where erected of Type I or II construc-
tion, the heights and areas of grain elevators and similar
structures shall be unlimited, and where of Type IV con-
struction, the maximum height shall be 65 feet (19 812
mm) and except further that, in isolated areas, the maxi-
mum height of Type IV structures shall be increased to
85 feet (25 908 mm).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:09 PM

28

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

65

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 415.3.1
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES FOR BUILDINGS CONTAINING EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS

QUANTITY OF EXPLOSIVE MATERIALa
Pounds over
Pounds not over

MINIMUM DISTANCE (feet)
Lot linesb and inhabited buildingsc
Barricadedd
Unbarricaded

Separation of magazinesd, e, f

2

5

70

140

12

5

10

90

180

16

10

20

110

220

20

20

30

125

250

22

30

40

140

280

24

40

50

150

300

28

50

75

170

340

30

75

100

190

380

32

100

125

200

400

36

125

150

215

430

38

150

200

235

470

42

200

250

255

510

46

250

300

270

540

48

300

400

295

590

54

400

500

320

640

58

500

600

340

680

62

600

700

355

710

64

700

800

375

750

66

800

900

390

780

70

900

1,000

400

800

72

1,000

1,200

425

850

78

1,200

1,400

450

900

82

1,400

1,600

470

940

86

1,600

1,800

490

980

88

1,800

2,000

505

1,010

90

2,000

2,500

545

1,090

98

2,500

3,000

580

1,160

104

3,000

4,000

635

1,270

116

4,000

5,000

685

1,370

122

5,000

6,000

730

1,460

130

6,000

7,000

770

1,540

136

7,000

8,000

800

1,600

144

8,000

9,000

835

1,670

150

9,000

10,000

865

1,730

156

10,000

12,000

875

1,750

164

12,000

14,000

885

1,770

174

14,000

16,000

900

1,800

180

16,000

18,000

940

1,880

188

18,000

20,000

975

1,950

196

20,000

25,000

1,055

2,000

210

25,000

30,000

1,130

2,000

224

30,000

35,000

1,205

2,000

238

35,000

40,000

1,275

2,000

248

(continued)

29

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:10 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

66

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

TABLE 415.3.1—continued
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCES FOR BUILDINGS CONTAINING EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS

QUANTITY OF EXPLOSIVE MATERIALa
Pounds over
Pounds not over

MINIMUM DISTANCE (feet)
Lot linesb and inhabited buildingsc
Barricadedd
Unbarricaded

Separation of magazinesd, e, f

40,000

45,000

1,340

2,000

258

45,000

50,000

1,400

2,000

270

50,000

55,000

1,460

2,000

280

55,000

60,000

1,515

2,000

290

60,000

65,000

1,565

2,000

300

65,000

70,000

1,610

2,000

310

70,000

75,000

1,655

2,000

320

75,000

80,000

1,695

2,000

330

80,000

85,000

1,730

2,000

340

85,000

90,000

1,760

2,000

350

90,000

95,000

1,790

2,000

360

95,000

100,000

1,815

2,000

370

100,000

110,000

1,835

2,000

390

110,000

120,000

1,855

2,000

410

120,000

130,000

1,875

2,000

430

130,000

140,000

1,890

2,000

450

140,000

150,000

1,900

2,000

470

150,000

160,000

1,935

2,000

490

160,000

170,000

1,965

2,000

510

170,000

180,000

1,990

2,000

530

180,000

190,000

2,010

2,010

550

190,000

200,000

2,030

2,030

570

200,000

210,000

2,055

2,055

590

210,000

230,000

2,100

2,100

630

230,000

250,000

2,155

2,155

670

250,000

275,000

2,215

2,215

720

275,000

300,000

2,275

2,275

770

For SI: 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. The number of pounds of explosives listed is the number of pounds of trinitrotoluene (TNT) or the equivalent pounds of other explosive.
b. The distance listed is the distance to lot line, including lot lines at public ways.
c. For the purpose of this table, an inhabited building is any building on the same lot that is regularly occupied by people. Where two or more buildings containing
explosives or magazines are located on the same lot, each building or magazine shall comply with the minimum distances specified from inhabited buildings and,
in addition, they shall be separated from each other by not less than the distance shown for “Separation of magazines,” except that the quantity of explosive materi-
als contained in detonator buildings or magazines shall govern in regard to the spacing of said detonator buildings or magazines from buildings or magazines con-
taining other explosive materials. If any two or more buildings or magazines are separated from each other by less than the specified “Separation of Magazines”
distances, then such two or more buildings or magazines, as a group, shall be considered as one building or magazine, and the total quantity of explosive materials
stored in such group shall be treated as if the explosive were in a single building or magazine located on the site of any building or magazine of the group, and shall
comply with the minimum distance specified from other magazines or inhabited buildings.
d. Barricades shall effectively screen the building containing explosives from other buildings, public ways or magazines. Where mounds or revetted walls of earth are
used for barricades, they shall not be less than 3 feet in thickness. A straight line from the top of any side wall of the building containing explosive materials to the
eave line of any other building, magazine or a point 12 feet above the centerline of a public way shall pass through the barricades.
e. Magazine is a building or structure, other than an operating building, approved for storage of explosive materials. Portable or mobile magazines not exceeding 120
square feet in area need not comply with the requirements of this code, however, all magazines shall comply with the International Fire Code.
f. The distance listed is permitted to be reduced by 50 percent where approved natural or artificial barriers are provided in accordance with the requirements in Note d.

30

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:12 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 415.3.2
DETACHED BUILDING REQUIRED

A DETACHED BUILDING IS REQUIRED WHEN THE QUANTITY OF MATERIAL EXCEEDS THAT LISTED HEREIN
Solids and Liquids (tons)a, b
Gases (cubic feet)a, b

Class

Material

Explosives

Oxidizers
Unstable (reactives) detonable

Oxidizer, liquids and solids

Organic peroxides

Unstable (reactives) nondetonable

Water reactives

Pyrophoric gases

Division 1.1
Division 1.2
Division 1.3
Division 1.4
Division 1.4c
Division 1.5
Division 1.6
Class 4
Class 3 or 4
Class 3
Class 2
Detonable
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class 3
Class 2
Class 3
Class 2
Not Applicable

Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
1
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
1,200
2,000
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
25
50
1
25
1
25
Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Maximum Allowable Quantity
Maximum Allowable Quantity
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
2,000
10,000
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
2,000

For SI: 1 ton = 906 kg, 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
a. For materials that are detonable, the distance to other buildings or lot lines shall be as specified in Table 415.3.1 based on trinitrotoluene (TNT) equivalence of the
material. For materials classified as explosives, see Chapter 33 the International Fire Code. For all other materials, the distance shall be as indicated in Section
415.3.1.
b. “Maximum Allowable Quantity” means the maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 307.7(1).
c. Limited to Division 1.4 materials and articles, including articles packaged for shipment, that are not regulated as an explosive under Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms (BATF) regulations or unpackaged articles used in process operations that do not propagate a detonation or deflagration between articles, providing
the net explosive weight of individual articles does not exceed 1 pound.

[F] 415.6.1.2 Grinding rooms. Every room or space
occupied for grinding or other operations that produce
combustible dusts shall be enclosed with fire barriers
constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizon-
tal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
712, or both. The minimum fire-resistance rating shall
be 2 hours where the area is not more than 3,000 square
feet (279 m2), and 4 hours where the area is greater than
3,000 square feet (279 m2).
[F] 415.6.1.3 Conveyors. Conveyors, chutes, piping and
similar equipment passing through the enclosures of
rooms or spaces shall be constructed dirt tight and vapor
tight, and be of approved noncombustible materials
complying with Chapter 30.
[F] 415.6.1.4 Explosion control. Explosion control
shall be provided as specified in the International Fire
Code, or spaces shall be equipped with the equivalent
mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Mechanical Code.

[F] 415.6.1.5 Grain elevators. Grain elevators, malt
houses and buildings for similar occupancies shall not be
located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of interior lot lines or
structures on the same lot, except where erected along a
railroad right-of-way.
[F] 415.6.1.6 Coal pockets. Coal pockets located less
than 30 feet (9144 mm) from interior lot lines or from

structures on the same lot shall be constructed of not less
than Type IB construction. Where more than 30 feet
(9144 mm) from interior lot lines, or where erected along
a railroad right-of-way, the minimum type of construc-
tion of such structures not more than 65 feet (19 812 mm)
in building height shall be Type IV.

[F] 415.6.2 Flammable and combustible liquids. The
storage, handling, processing and transporting of flamma-
ble and combustible liquids in Groups H-2 and H-3 occu-
pancies shall be in accordance with Sections 415.6.2.1
through 415.6.2.10, the International Mechanical Code and
the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.2.1 Mixed occupancies. Where the storage
tank area is located in a building of two or more occupan-
cies and the quantity of liquid exceeds the maximum
allowable quantity for one control area, the use shall be
completely separated from adjacent occupancies in
accordance with the requirements of Section 508.4.

[F] 415.6.2.1.1 Height exception. Where storage
tanks are located within a building no more than one
story above grade plane, the height limitation of Sec-
tion 503 shall not apply for Group H.

[F] 415.6.2.2 Tank protection. Storage tanks shall be
noncombustible and protected from physical damage.
Fire barriers or horizontal assemblies or both around the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

67

04_ibc_2009PG67.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:52:05 PM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

storage tank(s) shall be permitted as the method of pro-
tection from physical damage.
[F] 415.6.2.3 Tanks. Storage tanks shall be approved
tanks conforming to the requirements of the Interna-
tional Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.2.4 Suppression. Group H shall be equipped

throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler sys-
tem, installed in accordance with Section 903.
[F] 415.6.2.5 Leakage containment. A liquid-tight con-
tainment area compatible with the stored liquid shall be
provided. The method of spill control, drainage control
and secondary containment shall be in accordance with
the International Fire Code.
Exception: Rooms where only double-wall storage
tanks conforming to Section 415.6.2.3 are used to
store Class I, II and IIIA flammable and combustible
liquids shall not be required to have a leakage contain-
ment area.
[F] 415.6.2.6 Leakage alarm. An approved automatic
alarm shall be provided to indicate a leak in a storage
tank and room. The alarm shall sound an audible signal,
15 dBa above the ambient sound level, at every point of
entry into the room in which the leaking storage tank is
located. An approved sign shall be posted on every entry
door to the tank storage room indicating the potential
hazard of the interior room environment, or the sign shall
state: WARNING, WHEN ALARM SOUNDS, THE
ENVIRONMENT WITHIN THE ROOM MAY BE
HAZARDOUS. The leakage alarm shall also be super-
vised in accordance with Chapter 9 to transmit a trouble
signal.
[F] 415.6.2.7 Tank vent. Storage tank vents for Class I,
II or IIIA liquids shall terminate to the outdoor air in
accordance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.2.8 Room ventilation. Storage tank areas stor-
ing Class I, II or IIIA liquids shall be provided with
mechanical ventilation. The mechanical ventilation sys-
tem shall be in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code and the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.2.9 Explosion venting. Where Class I liquids
are being stored, explosion venting shall be provided in
accordance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.6.2.10 Tank openings other than vents. Tank
openings other than vents from tanks inside buildings
shall be designed to ensure that liquids or vapor concen-
trations are not released inside the building.
[F] 415.6.3 Liquefied petroleum gas facilities. The con-
struction and installation of liquefied petroleum gas facili-
ties shall be in accordance with the requirements of this
code,
the International Fire Code,
the International
Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code and
NFPA 58.

[F] 415.6.4 Dry cleaning plants. The construction and
installation of dry cleaning plants shall be in accordance
with the requirements of this code,
the International
Mechanical Code, the International Plumbing Code and
NFPA 32. Dry cleaning solvents and systems shall be classi-
fied in accordance with the International Fire Code.
[F] 415.7 Groups H-3 and H-4. Groups H-3 and H-4 shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this code and the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.7.1 Flammable and combustible liquids. The
storage, handling, processing and transporting of flamma-
ble and combustible liquids in Group H-3 occupancies shall
be in accordance with Section 415.6.2.
[F] 415.7.2 Gas rooms. When gas rooms are provided, such
rooms shall be separated from other areas by not less than
1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section
707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance
with Section 712, or both.
[F] 415.7.3 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage
areas for corrosive liquids and highly toxic or toxic materials
shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.
[F] 415.7.4 Separation—highly toxic solids and liquids.
Highly toxic solids and liquids not stored in approved haz-
ardous materials storage cabinets shall be isolated from
other hazardous materials storage by not less than 1-hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 712, or both.
[F] 415.8 Group H-5.
[F] 415.8.1 General. In addition to the requirements set
forth elsewhere in this code, Group H-5 shall comply with
the provisions of Sections 415.8.1 through 415.8.11 and the
International Fire Code.

[F] 415.8.2 Fabrication areas.
[F] 415.8.2.1 Hazardous materials in fabrication
areas.
[F] 415.8.2.1.1 Aggregate quantities. The aggregate
quantities of hazardous materials stored and used in a
single fabrication area shall not exceed the quantities
set forth in Table 415.8.2.1.1.
Exception: The quantity limitations for any haz-
ard category in Table 415.8.2.1.1 shall not apply
where the fabrication area contains quantities of
hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum
allowable quantities per control area established
by Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2).
[F] 415.8.2.1.2 Hazardous production materials.
The maximum quantities of hazardous production
materials (HPM) stored in a single fabrication area
shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities
per control area established by Tables 307.1(1) and
307.1(2).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

➡

68

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:13 PM

32

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] TABLE 415.8.2.1.1
QUANTITY LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN A SINGLE FABRICATION AREA IN GROUP H-5a

HAZARD CATEGORY

SOLIDS
(pounds per square feet)

LIQUIDS
(gallons per square feet)

GAS
(feet3 @ NTP/square feet)

PHYSICAL-HAZARD MATERIALS

Combustible dust

Combustible fiber

Combustible liquid

Combination Class I, II and IIIA

Cryogenic gas

Explosives

Flammable gas

Flammable liquid

Combination Class IA, IB and IC
Combination Class I, II and IIIA

Loose
Baled

II
IIIA
IIIB

Flammable
Oxidizing

Gaseous
Liquefied

IA
IB
IC

Flammable solid

Organic peroxide
Unclassified detonable
Class I
Class II
Class III
Class IV
Class V

Oxidizing gas

Combination of gaseous
and liquefied

Oxidizer

Combination

Pyrophoric material

Unstable reactive

Water reactive

Corrosives

Highly toxic

Toxics

Gaseous
Liquefied

Class 4
Class 3
Class 2
Class 1
Class 1, 2, 3

Class 4
Class 3
Class 2
Class 1

Class 3
Class 2
Class 1

Note b

Note b
Notes b, c

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

0.01
0.02
Not Limited
0.04

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Note b

Note b

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

0.001

Note b
Note b
0.025
0.1
Not Limited
Not limited

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Note d
1.25

Note b

Note d
Note d

Not Applicable

0.0025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.04

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Not Applicable

Note b
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003

Note b

Note b
0.025
0.1
Not Limited

Note b
0.25
Not Limited

HEALTH-HAZARD MATERIALS

Not Limited

Not Limited

Not Limited

Note b
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.00125

Note b
0.0025
0.01
Not Limited

0.00125
0.025
Not Limited

Not Limited

Not Limited

Not Limited

1.25
1.25

1.25

Not Applicable

Notes d and e

Note b
Note b
Note b
Not Limited

Not Applicable

Not Limited

Note d

Note d

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2, 1 gallon per square foot = 40.7 L/m2, 1 cubic foot @ NTP/square foot = 0.305 m3 @ NTP/m2,
1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3.
a. Hazardous materials within piping shall not be included in the calculated quantities.
b. Quantity of hazardous materials in a single fabrication shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2).
c. Densely packed baled cotton that complies with the packing requirements of ISO 8115 shall not be included in this material class.
d. The aggregate quantity of flammable, pyrophoric, toxic and highly toxic gases shall not exceed 9,000 cubic feet at NTP.
e. The aggregate quantity of pyrophoric gases in the building shall not exceed the amounts set forth in Table 415.3.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

69

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:13 PM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] 415.8.2.2 Separation. Fabrication areas, whose
sizes are limited by the quantity of hazardous materials
allowed by Table 415.8.2.1.1, shall be separated from
each other, from corridors and from other parts of the
building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed
in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Doors within such fire barrier walls, including
doors to corridors, shall be only self-closing
fire door assemblies having a fire protection
rating of not less than 3/4 hour.
2. Windows between fabrication areas and cor-
ridors are permitted to be fixed glazing listed
and labeled for a fire protection rating of at
least 3/4 hour in accordance with Section 715.
[F] 415.8.2.3 Location of occupied levels. Occupied
levels of fabrication areas shall be located at or above the
first story above grade plane.
[F] 415.8.2.4 Floors. Except for surfacing, floors within
fabrication areas shall be of noncombustible construc-
tion.
Openings through floors of fabrication areas are per-
mitted to be unprotected where the interconnected levels
are used solely for mechanical equipment directly
related to such fabrication areas (see also Section
415.8.2.5).
Floors forming a part of an occupancy separation shall
be liquid tight.
[F] 415.8.2.5 Shafts and openings through floors. Ele-
vator shafts, vent shafts and other openings through
floors shall be enclosed when required by Section 708.
Mechanical, duct and piping penetrations within a fabri-
cation area shall not extend through more than two
floors. The annular space around penetrations for
cables, cable trays, tubing, piping, conduit or ducts shall
be sealed at the floor level to restrict the movement of air.
The fabrication area, including the areas through which
the ductwork and piping extend, shall be considered a
single conditioned environment.
[F] 415.8.2.6 Ventilation. Mechanical exhaust ventila-
tion at the rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per
square foot [0.0051 m3/(s · m2)] of floor area shall be pro-
vided throughout the portions of the fabrication area
where HPM are used or stored. The exhaust air duct sys-
tem of one fabrication area shall not connect to another
duct system outside that fabrication area within the
building.
A ventilation system shall be provided to capture and
exhaust gases, fumes and vapors at workstations.
Two or more operations at a workstation shall not be
connected to the same exhaust system where either one
or the combination of the substances removed could con-
stitute a fire, explosion or hazardous chemical reaction
within the exhaust duct system.

70

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:14 PM

34

Exhaust ducts penetrating occupancy separations
shall be contained in a shaft of equivalent fire-resis-
tance-rated construction. Exhaust ducts shall not pene-
trate fire walls.
Fire dampers shall not be installed in exhaust ducts.
[F] 415.8.2.7 Transporting hazardous production
materials to fabrication areas. HPM shall be trans-
ported to fabrication areas through enclosed piping or
tubing systems that comply with Section 415.8.6.1,
through service corridors complying with Section
415.8.4, or in corridors as permitted in the exception to
Section 415.8.3. The handling or transporting of HPM
within service corridors shall comply with the Interna-
tional Fire Code.

[F] 415.8.2.8 Electrical.
[F] 415.8.2.8.1 General. Electrical equipment and
devices within the fabrication area shall comply with
NFPA 70. The requirements for hazardous locations
need not be applied where the average air change is at
least four times that set forth in Section 415.8.2.6 and
where the number of air changes at any location is not
less than th ree t imes tha t requ ired by Sec t ion
415.8.2.6. The use of recirculated air shall be permit-
ted.
[F] 415.8.2.8.2 Workstations. Workstations shall not
be energized without adequate exhaust ventilation.
See Section 415.8.2.6 for workstation exhaust venti-
lation requirements.
[F] 415.8.3 Corridors. Corridors shall comply with Chap-
ter 10 and shall be separated from fabrication areas as speci-
fied in Section 415.8.2.2. Corridors shall not contain HPM
and shall not be used for transporting such materials, except
through closed piping systems as provided in Section
415.8.6.3.
Exception: Where existing fabrication areas are altered
or modified, HPM is allowed to be transported in existing
corridors, subject to the following conditions:
1. Corridors. Corridors adjacent to the fabrication
area where the alteration work is to be done shall
comply with Section 1018 for a length determined
as follows:
1.1. The length of the common wall of the cor-
ridor and the fabrication area; and
1.2. For the distance along the corridor to the
point of entry of HPM into the corridor
serving that fabrication area.
2. Emergency alarm system. There shall be an emer-
gency telephone system, a local manual alarm sta-
tion or other approved alarm-initiating device
within corridors at not more than 150-foot (45 720
mm) intervals and at each exit and doorway. The
signal shall be relayed to an approved central, pro-
prietary or remote station service or the emergency
control station and shall also initiate a local audible
alarm.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

3. Pass-throughs. Self-closing doors having a fire
protection rating of not less than 1 hour shall sepa-
ra te pa s s - th rough s f rom ex is t ing co r r ido r s .
Pass-throughs shall be constructed as required for
the corridors and protected by an approved auto-
matic fire-extinguishing system.
[F] 415.8.4 Service corridors.
[F] 415.8.4.1 Occupancy. Service corridors shall be
classified as Group H-5.
[F] 415.8.4.2 Use conditions. Service corridors shall be
sepa ra ted f rom corr idors as requ i red by Sec t ion
415.8.2.2. Service corridors shall not be used as a
required corridor.
[F] 415.8.4.3 Mechanical ventilation. Service corridors
shall be mechanically ventilated as required by Section
415.8.2.6 or at not less than six air changes per hour,
whichever is greater.
[F] 415.8.4.4 Means of egress. The maximum distance
of travel from any point in a service corridor to an exit,
exit access corridor or door into a fabrication area shall
not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm). Dead ends shall not
exceed 4 feet (1219 mm) in length. There shall be not less
than two exits, and not more than one-half of the required
means of egress shall require travel into a fabrication
area. Doors from service corridors shall swing in the
direction of egress travel and shall be self-closing.
[F] 415.8.4.5 Minimum width. The minimum clear
width of a service corridor shall be 5 feet (1524 mm), or
33 inches (838 mm) wider than the widest cart or truck
used in the corridor, whichever is greater.
[F] 415.8.4.6 Emergency alarm system. Emergency
alarm systems shall be provided in accordance with this
section and Sections 414.7.1 and 414.7.2. The maximum
allowable quantity per control area provisions shall not
apply to emergency alarm systems required for HPM.
[F] 415.8.4.6.1 Service corridors. An emergency
alarm system shall be provided in service corridors,
with at least one alarm device in each service corridor.
[F] 415.8.4.6.2 Exit access corridors and exit enclo-
sures. Emergency alarms for exit access corridors
and ex i t enc losures sha l l comp ly w i th Sec t ion
414.7.2.
[F] 415.8.4.6.3 Liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms
and gas rooms. Emergency alarms for liquid storage
rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms shall comply with
Section 414.7.1.
[F ] 415 .8 .4 .6 .4 A la rm - in i t ia t ing dev ice s . An
approved emergency telephone system, local alarm
manual pull stations, or other approved alarm-initiat-
ing devices are allowed to be used as emergency
alarm-initiating devices.
[F] 415.8.4.6.5 Alarm signals. Activation of the
emergency alarm system shall sound a local alarm
and transmit a signal to the emergency control station.

[F] 415.8.5 Storage of hazardous production materials.

[F] 415.8.5.1 General. Storage of HPM in fabrication
areas shall be within approved or listed storage cabinets
or gas cabinets or within a workstation. The storage of
HPM in quantities greater than those listed in Section
1804.2 of the International Fire Code shall be in liquid
storage rooms, HPM rooms or gas rooms as appropriate
for the materials stored. The storage of other hazardous
materials shall be in accordance with other applicable
provisions of this code and the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.8.5.2 Construction.

[F] 415.8.5.2.1 HPM rooms and gas rooms. HPM
rooms and gas rooms shall be separated from other
areas by fire barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both. The minimum
fire-resistance rating shall be 2 hours where the area
is 300 square feet (27.9 m2) or more and 1 hour where
the area is less than 300 square feet (27.9 m2).

[F] 415.8.5.2.2 Liquid storage rooms. Liquid stor-
age rooms shall be constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:

1. Rooms in excess of 500 square feet (46.5 m2)
shall have at least one exterior door approved
for fire department access.
2. Rooms shall be separated from other areas by
fire barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or
both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less
than 1 hour for rooms up to 150 square feet
(13.9 m2) in area and not less than 2 hours where
the room is more than 150 square feet (13.9 m2)
in area.
3. Shelving, racks and wainscotting in such areas
shall be of noncombustible construction or
wood of not less than 1-inch (25 mm) nominal
thickness.
4. Rooms used for the storage of Class I flamma-
ble liquids shall not be located in a basement.

[F] 415.8.5.2.3 Floors. Except for surfacing, floors of
HPM rooms and liquid storage rooms shall be of
noncombustible liquid-tight construction. Raised
grating over floors shall be of noncombustible materi-
als.

[F] 415.8.5.3 Location. Where HPM rooms, liquid stor-
age rooms and gas rooms are provided, they shall have at
least one exterior wall and such wall shall be not less than
30 feet (9144 mm) from lot lines, including lot lines adja-
cent to public ways.

[F] 415.8.5.4 Explosion control. Explosion control
shall be provided where required by Section 414.5.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

71

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:14 PM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] 415.8.5.5 Exits. Where two exits are required from
HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms, one
shall be directly to the outside of the building.
[F] 415.8.5.6 Doors. Doors in a fire barrier wall, includ-
ing doors to corridors, shall be self-closing fire door
assemblies having a fire-protection rating of not less
than 3/4 hour.
[F] 415.8.5.7 Ventilation. Mechanical exhaust ventila-
tion shall be provided in liquid storage rooms, HPM
rooms and gas rooms at the rate of not less than 1 cubic
foot per minute per square foot (0.044 L/s/m2) of floor
area or six air changes per hour, whichever is greater, for
categories of material.
Exhaust ventilation for gas rooms shall be designed to
operate at a negative pressure in relation to the surround-
ing areas and direct the exhaust ventilation to an exhaust
system.
[F] 415.8.5.8 Emergency alarm system. An approved
emergency alarm system shall be provided for HPM
rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms.
Emergency alarm-initiating devices shall be installed
outside of each interior exit door of such rooms.
Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device
shall sound a local alarm and transmit a signal to the
emergency control station.
An approved emergency telephone system, local
alarm manual pull stations or other approved alarm-initi-
ating devices are allowed to be used as emergency
alarm-initiating devices.
[F] 415.8.6 Piping and tubing.
[F] 415.8.6.1 General. Hazardous production materials
piping and tubing shall comply with this section and
ASME B31.3.
[F] 415.8.6.2 Supply piping and tubing .
[F] 415.8.6.2.1 HPM having a health-hazard rank-
ing of 3 or 4. Systems supplying HPM liquids or
gases having a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4 shall be
welded throughout, except for connections, to the
systems that are within a ventilated enclosure if the
material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage
or containment is provided for the connections if the
material is a liquid.
[F] 415.8.6.2.2 Location in service corridors. Haz-
ardous production materials supply piping or tubing
in service corridors shall be exposed to view.
[F] 415.8.6.2.3 Excess flow control. Where HPM
gases or liquids are carried in pressurized piping
above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (103.4
kPa), excess flow control shall be provided. Where
the piping originates from within a liquid storage
room, HPM room or gas room, the excess flow con-
trol shall be located within the liquid storage room,
HPM room or gas room. Where the piping originates
from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be
located as close to the bulk source as practical.

72

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:15 PM

36

[F] 415.8.6.3 Installations in corridors and above
other occupancies. The installation of HPM piping and
tubing within the space defined by the walls of corridors
and the floor or roof above, or in concealed spaces above
other occupancies, shall be in accordance with Section
415.8.6.2 and the following conditions:
1. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed within the
space unless the space is less than 6 inches (152
mm) in the least dimension.
2. Ventilation not less than six air changes per hour
shall be provided. The space shall not be used to
convey air from any other area.
3. Where the piping or tubing is used to transport
HPM liquids, a receptor shall be installed below
such piping or tubing. The receptor shall be
designed to collect any discharge or leakage and
drain it to an approved location. The 1-hour enclo-
sure shall not be used as part of the receptor.
4. HPM supply piping and tubing and nonmetallic
waste lines shall be separated from the corridor
and from occupancies other than Group H-5 by
fire barriers that have a fire-resistance rating of
not less than 1 hour. Where gypsum wallboard is
used, joints on the piping side of the enclosure are
not required to be taped, provided the joints occur
over framing members. Access openings into the
enclosure shall be protected by approved fire pro-
tection-rated assemblies.
5. Readily accessible manual or automatic remotely
activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall
be installed on piping and tubing other than waste
lines at the following locations:
5.1. At branch connections into the fabrication
area.
5.2. At entries into corridors.
Exception: Transverse crossings of the
c o r r i d o r s b y s u p p l y p i p i n g t h a t i s
enclosed within a ferrous pipe or tube for
the width of the corridor need not comply
with Items 1 through 5.
[F] 415.8.6.4 Identification. Piping, tubing and HPM
waste lines shall be identified in accordance with ANSI
A13.1 to indicate the material being transported.
[F] 415.8.7 Continuous gas detection systems. A continu-
ous gas detection system shall be provided for HPM gases
when the physiological warning threshold level of the gas is
at a higher level than the accepted PEL for the gas and for
flammable gases in accordance with Sections 415.8.7.1 and
415.8.7.2.
[F] 415.8.7.1 Where required. A continuous gas detec-
tion system shall be provided in the areas identified in
Sections 415.8.7.1.1 through 415.8.7.1.4.
[F] 415.8.7.1.1 Fabrication areas. A continuous gas
detection system shall be provided in fabrication
areas when gas is used in the fabrication area.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] 415.8.7.1.2 HPM rooms. A continuous gas
detection system shall be provided in HPM rooms
when gas is used in the room.
[F] 415.8.7.1.3 Gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures
and gas rooms. A continuous gas detection system
shall be provided in gas cabinets and exhausted enclo-
sures. A continuous gas detection system shall be pro-
vided in gas rooms when gases are not located in gas
cabinets or exhausted enclosures.
[F] 415.8.7.1.4 Corridors. When gases are trans-
ported in piping placed within the space defined by
the walls of a corridor and the floor or roof above the
corridor, a continuous gas detection system shall be
provided where piping is located and in the corridor.
Exception: A continuous gas detection system is
not required for occasional transverse crossings of
the corridors by supply piping that is enclosed in a
ferrous pipe or tube for the width of the corridor.
[F] 415.8.7.2 Gas detection system operation. The
continuous gas detection system shall be capable of
monitoring the room, area or equipment in which the gas
is located at or below all the following gas concentra-
tions:
1. Immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH)
values when the monitoring point is within an
exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas
cabinet.
2. Permissible exposure limit (PEL) levels when the
monitoring point is in an area outside an exhausted
enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.
3. For flammable gases, the monitoring detection
threshold level shall be vapor concentrations in
excess of 25 percent of the lower flammable limit
(LFL) when the monitoring is within or outside an
exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas
cabinet.
4. Except as noted in this section, monitoring for
highly toxic and toxic gases shall also comply with
Chapter 37 of the International Fire Code.

[F] 415.8.7.2.1 Alarms. The gas detection system
shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the
emergency control station when a short-term hazard
condition is detected. The alarm shall be both visual
and audible and shall provide warning both inside and
outside the area where the gas is detected. The audible
alarm shall be distinct from all other alarms.
[F] 415.8.7.2.2 Shutoff of gas supply. The gas detec-
tion system shall automatically close the shutoff valve
at the source on gas supply piping and tubing related
to the system being monitored for which gas is
detected when a short-term hazard condition is
detected. Automatic closure of shutoff valves shall
comply with the following:
1. Where the gas detection sampling point initiat-
ing the gas detection system alarm is within a
gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure, the shutoff

valve in the gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure
for the specific gas detected shall automatically
close.
2. Where the gas detection sampling point initiat-
ing the gas detection system alarm is within a
room and compressed gas containers are not in
gas cabinets or an exhausted enclosure, the
shutoff valves on all gas lines for the specific
gas detected shall automatically close.
3. Where the gas detection sampling point initiat-
ing the gas detection system alarm is within a
piping distribution manifold enclosure, the
shutoff valve supplying the manifold for the
compressed gas container of the specific gas
detected shall automatically close.
Exception: Where the gas detection sampling
point initiating the gas detection system alarm is at
the use location or within a gas valve enclosure of a
branch line downstream of a piping distribution
manifold, the shutoff valve for the branch line
located in the piping distribution manifold enclo-
sure shall automatically close.
[F] 415.8.8 Manual fire alarm system. An approved man-
ual fire alarm system shall be provided throughout buildings
containing Group H-5. Activation of the alarm system shall
initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency
control station. The fire alarm system shall be designed and
installed in accordance with Section 907.
[F] 415.8.9 Emergency control station. An emergency
control station shall be provided in accordance with Sec-
tions 415.8.9.1 through 415.8.9.3.
[F] 415.8.9.1 Location. The emergency control station
shall be located on the premises at an approved location
outside the fabrication area.
[F] 415.8.9.2 Staffing. Trained personnel shall continu-
ously staff the emergency control station.
[F] 415.8.9.3 Signals. The emergency control station
shall receive signals from emergency equipment and
alarm and detection systems. Such emergency equip-
ment and alarm and detection systems shall include, but
not be limited to, the following where such equipment or
systems are required to be provided either in this chapter
or elsewhere in this code:
1. Automatic sprinkler system alarm and monitoring
systems.
2. Manual fire alarm systems.
3. Emergency alarm systems.
4. Continuous gas detection systems.
5. Smoke detection systems.
6. Emergency power system.
7. Au toma t ic de tec t ion and a la rm sy s tems fo r
pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liq-
uids required in Section 1805.2.3.4 of the Interna-
tional Fire Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

73

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:16 PM

37

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

8. Exh au s t v en t i la t ion f low a la rm d ev ice s fo r
pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liq-
uids cabinet exhaust ventilation systems required
in Section 1805.2.3.4 of the International Fire
Code.

[F] 415.8.10 Emergency power system. An emergency
power system shall be provided in Group H-5 occupancies
where required in Section 415.8.10.1. The emergency
power system shall be designed to supply power automati-
cally to required electrical systems when the normal electri-
cal supply system is interrupted.
[F] 415.8.10.1 Required electrical systems. Emer-
gency power shall be provided for electrically operated
equipment and connected control circuits for the follow-
ing systems:
1. HPM exhaust ventilation systems.
2. HPM gas cabinet ventilation systems.
3. HPM exhausted enclosure ventilation systems.
4. HPM gas room ventilation systems.
5. HPM gas detection systems.
6. Emergency alarm systems.
7. Manual fire alarm systems.
8. Automatic sprinkler system monitoring and
alarm systems.
9. Automatic alarm and detection systems for
pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive
liquids required in Section 1805.2.3.4 of the
International Fire Code.
10. Flow alarm switches for pyrophoric liquids and
Class 3 water-reactive liquids cabinet exhaust
v e n t i l a t i o n s y s t em s r e q u i r e d i n S e c t i o n
1805.2.3.4 of the International Fire Code.
11. Electrically operated systems required elsewhere
in this code or in the International Fire Code
applicable to the use, storage or handling of
HPM.
[F] 415.8.10.2 Exhaust ventilation systems. Exhaust
ventilation systems are allowed to be designed to operate
at not less than one-half the normal fan speed on the
emergency power system where it is demonstrated that
the level of exhaust will maintain a safe atmosphere.
[F] 415.8.11 Automatic sprinkler system protection in
exhaust ducts for HPM.
[F] 415.8.11.1 Exhaust ducts for HPM. An approved
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in exhaust
ducts conveying gases, vapors, fumes, mists or dusts
generated from HPM in accordance with this section and
the International Mechanical Code.

[F] 415.8.11.2 Metallic and noncombustible nonme-

tallic exhaust ducts. An approved automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided in metallic and noncombustible

nonmetallic exhaust ducts when all of the following con-
ditions apply:
1. Where the largest cross-sectional diameter is equal
to or greater than 10 inches (254 mm).
2. The ducts are within the building.
3. The ducts are conveying flammable gases, vapors
or fumes.
[F] 415.8.11.3 Combustible nonmetallic exhaust

ducts. Automatic sprinkler system protection shall be
provided in combustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts
where the largest cross-sectional diameter of the duct is
equal to or greater than 10 inches (254 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Ducts listed or approved for applications with-
out automatic fire sprinkler system protection.
2. Ducts not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) in
length installed below ceiling level.
[F] 415.8.11.4 Automatic sprinkler locations. Sprin-
kler systems shall be installed at 12-foot (3658 mm)
intervals in horizontal ducts and at changes in direction.
In vertical ducts, sprinklers shall be installed at the top
and at alternate floor levels.

SECTION 416
APPLICATION OF FLAMMABLE FINISHES

[F] 416.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
the construction, installation and use of buildings and struc-
tures, or parts thereof, for the spraying of flammable paints,
varnishes and lacquers or other flammable materials or mix-
tures or compounds used for painting, varnishing, staining or
similar purposes. Such construction and equipment shall com-
ply with the International Fire Code.
[F] 416.2 Spray rooms. Spray rooms shall be enclosed with
not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both. Floors shall be water-
proofed and drained in an approved manner.
[F] 416.2.1 Surfaces. The interior surfaces of spray rooms
shall be smooth and shall be so constructed to permit the
free passage of exhaust air from all parts of the interior and
to facilitate washing and cleaning, and shall be so designed
to confine residues within the room. Aluminum shall not be
used.
[F] 416.3 Spraying spaces. Spraying spaces shall be venti-
lated with an exhaust system to prevent the accumulation of
flammable mist or vapors in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code. Where such spaces are not separately
enclosed, noncombustible spray curtains shall be provided to
restrict the spread of flammable vapors.
[F] 416.3.1 Surfaces. The interior surfaces of spraying
spaces shall be smooth and continuous without edges; shall
be so constructed to permit the free passage of exhaust air
from all parts of the interior and to facilitate washing and

74

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:16 PM

38

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

cleaning; and shall be so designed to confine residues within
the spraying space. Aluminum shall not be used.
[F] 416.4 Spray booths. Spray booths shall be designed, con-
structed and operated in accordance with the International Fire
Code.
[F] 416.5 Fire protection. An automatic fire-extinguishing
system shall be provided in all spray, dip and immersing spaces
and storage rooms and shall be installed in accordance with
Chapter 9.

SECTION 417
DRYING ROOMS

[F] 417.1 General. A drying room or dry kiln installed within a
b u i l d i n g s h a l l b e c o n s t r u c t e d e n t i r e l y o f a p p ro v e d
noncombustible materials or assemblies of such materials reg-
ulated by the approved rules or as required in the general and
specific sections of Chapter 4 for special occupancies and
where applicable to the general requirements of Chapter 28.
[F] 417.2 Piping clearance. Overhead heating pipes shall have
a clearance of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from combustible
contents in the dryer.
[F] 417.3 Insulation. Where the operating temperature of the
dryer is 175°F (79°C) or more, metal enclosures shall be insu-
lated from adjacent combustible materials by not less than 12
inches (305 mm) of airspace, or the metal walls shall be lined
with 1/4-inch (6.35 mm) insulating mill board or other approved
equivalent insulation.
[F] 417 .4 Fire protection . Drying rooms designed for
high-hazard materials and processes, including special occu-
pancies as provided for in Chapter 4, shall be protected by an
approved automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with
the provisions of Chapter 9.

SECTION 418
ORGANIC COATINGS

[F] 418.1 Building features. Manufacturing of organic coat-
ings shall be done only in buildings that do not have pits or
basements.
[F] 418.2 Location. Organic coating manufacturing opera-
tions and operations incidental to or connected therewith shall
not be located in buildings having other occupancies.
[F] 418.3 Process mills. Mills operating with close clearances
and that process flammable and heat-sensitive materials, such
as nitrocellulose, shall be located in a detached building or
noncombustible structure.
[F] 418.4 Tank storage. Storage areas for flammable and com-
bustible liquid tanks inside of structures shall be located at or
above grade and shall be separated from the processing area by
not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both.
[F] 418.5 Nitrocellulose storage. Nitrocellulose storage shall
be located on a detached pad or in a separate structure or a room
enclosed with no less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in

accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
[F] 418.6 Finished products. Storage rooms for finished prod-
ucts that are flammable or combustible liquids shall be sepa-
rated from the processing area by not less than 2-hour fire
barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or hori-
zontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712,
or both.

SECTION 419
LIVE/WORK UNITS

419.1 General. A live/work unit is a dwelling unit or sleeping
unit in which a significant portion of the space includes a non-
residential use that is operated by the tenant and shall comply
with Sections 419.1 through 419.8.
Exception: Dwelling or sleeping units that include an
office that is less than 10 percent of the area of the dwell-
ing unit shall not be classified as a live/work unit.
419.1.1 Limitations. The following shall apply to all
live/work areas:
1. The live/work unit is permitted to be a maximum of
3,000 square feet (279 m2);
2. The nonresidential area is permitted to be a maximum
50 percent of the area of each live/work unit;
3. The nonresidential area function shall be limited to
the first or main floor only of the live/work unit; and
4. A max imum of f ive nonres iden tia l workers or
employees are allowed to occupy the nonresidential
area at any one time.
419.2 Occupancies. Live/work units shall be classified as a
Group R-2 occupancy. Separation requirements found in Sec-
tions 420 and 508 shall not apply within the live/work unit
when the live/work unit is in compliance with Section 419.
High-hazard and storage occupancies shall not be permitted in
a live/work unit. The aggregate area of storage in the nonresi-
dential portion of the live/work unit shall be limited to 10 per-
cent of the space dedicated to nonresidential activities.
419.3 Means of egress. Except as modified by this section, the
provisions for Group R-2 occupancies in Chapter 10 shall
apply to the entire live/work unit.
419.3.1 Egress capacity. The egress capacity for each ele-
ment of the live/work unit shall be based on the occupant
load for the function served in accordance with Table
1004.1.1.
419.3.2 Sliding doors. Where doors in a means of egress are
of the horizontal-sliding type, the force to slide the door to
its fully open position shall not exceed 50 pounds (220 N)
with a perpendicular force against the door of 50 pounds
(220 N).
419.3.3 Spiral stairways. Spiral stairways that conform to
the requirements of Section 1009.9 shall be permitted.
419.3.4 Locks. Egress doors shall be permitted to be locked
in accordance with Exception 4 of Section 1008.1.9.3.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

75

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:17 PM

39

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

419.4 Vertical openings. Floor openings between floor levels
of a live/work unit are permitted without enclosure.
419.5 Fire protection. The live/work unit shall be provided
with a monitored fire alarm system where required by Section
907.2.9 and an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.2.8.
419.6 Structural. Floor loading for the areas within a
live/work unit shall be designed to conform to Table 1607.1
based on the function within the space.
419.7 Accessibility. Accessibility shall be designed in accor-
dance with Chapter 11.
419.8 Ventilation. The applicable requirements of the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code shall apply to each area within the
live/work unit for the function within that space.

SECTION 420
GROUPS I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3

420.1 General. Occupancies in Groups I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3
shall comply with the provisions of this section and other appli-
cable provisions of this code.
420.2 Separation walls. Walls separating dwelling units in the
same building, walls separating sleeping units in the same
building and walls separating dwelling or sleeping units from
other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building
shall be constructed as fire partitions in accordance with Sec-
tion 709.
420.3 Horizontal separation. Floor assemblies separating
dwelling units in the same buildings, floor assemblies separat-
ing sleeping units in the same building and floor assemblies
separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies
contiguous to them in the same building shall be constructed as
horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 712.

SECTION 421
HYDROGEN CUTOFF ROOMS

[F] 421.1 General. When required by the International Fire
Code, hydrogen cutoff rooms shall be designed and con-
structed in accordance with Sections 421.1 through 421.8 .
[F] 421.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
[F] GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM. An assembly of
piping, devices and apparatus designed to generate, store, con-
tain, distribute or transport a nontoxic, gaseous hydrogen-con-
taining mixture having at least 95-percent hydrogen gas by
volume and not more than 1-percent oxygen by volume. Gas-
eous hydrogen systems consist of items such as compressed
gas containers, reactors and appurtenances, including pressure
regulators, pressure relief devices, manifolds, pumps, com-
pressors and interconnecting piping and tubing and controls.
[F] HYDROGEN CUTOFF ROOM. A room or space that is
intended exclusively to house a gaseous hydrogen system.
[F] 421.3 Location. Hydrogen cutoff rooms shall not be
located below grade.

[F] 421.4 Design and construction. Hydrogen cutoff rooms
shall be classified with respect to occupancy in accordance
with Section 302.1 and separated from other areas of the build-
ing by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both; or as required by Section
508.2, 508.3 or 508.4, as applicable.

[F] 421.4.1 Opening protectives. Doors within the fire bar-
riers, including doors to corridors, shall be self-closing in
accordance with Section 715. Interior door openings shall
be electronically interlocked to prevent operation of the
hydrogen system when doors are opened or ajar or the room
shall be provided with a mechanical exhaust ventilation sys-
tem designed in accordance with Section 421.4.1.1.

[F] 421.4.1.1 Ventilation alternative. When an exhaust
system is used in lieu of the interlock system required by
Section 421.4.1, exhaust ventilation systems shall oper-
ate continuously and shall be designed to operate at a
negative pressure in relation to the surrounding area. The
average velocity of ventilation at the face of the door
opening with the door in the fully open position shall not
be less than 60 feet per minute (0.3048 m/s) with a mini-
mum of 45 feet per minute (0.2287 m/s) at any point in
the door opening.

[F] 421.4.2 Windows. Operable windows in interior walls
shall not be permitted. Fixed windows shall be permitted
when in accordance with Section 715.

[F] 421.5 Ventilation. Cutoff rooms shall be provided with
mechanical ventilation in accordance with the applicable pro-
visions for repair garages in Chapter 5 of the International
Mechanical Code.

[F] 421.6 Gas detection system. Hydrogen cutoff rooms shall
be provided with an approved flammable gas detection system
in accordance with Sections 421.6.1 through 421.6.3.

[F] 421.6.1 System design. The flammable gas detection
system shall be listed for use with hydrogen and any other
flammable gases used in the room. The gas detection system
shall be designed to activate when the level of flammable
gas exceeds 25 percent of the lower flammability limit
(LFL) for the gas or mixtures present at their anticipated
temperature and pressure.

[F] 421.6.2 Operation. Activation of the gas detection sys-
tem shall result in all of the following:

1. Initiation of distinct audible and visual alarm signals
both inside and outside of the cutoff room.
2. Activation of the mechanical ventilation system.
[F] 421.6.3 Failure of the gas detection system. Failure of
the gas detection system shall result in activation of the
mechanical ventilation system, cessation of hydrogen gen-
eration and the sounding of a trouble signal in an approved
location.

[F] 421.7 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Chapter 9 of the International Fire
Code.

76

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:17 PM

40

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY

[F] 421.8 Standby power. Mechanical ventilation and gas
detection systems shall be connected to a standby power sys-
tem in accordance with Chapter 27.

Residential storm shelter. A storm shelter serving occu-
pants of dwelling units and having an occupant load not
exceeding 16 persons.

SECTION 422
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITIES

422.1 General. Occupancies classified as Group B ambulatory
health care facilities shall comply with the provisions of Sec-
tions 422.1 through 422.6 and other applicable provisions of
this code.
422.2 Smoke barriers. Smoke barriers shall be provided to
subdivide every ambulatory care facility greater than 10,000
square feet (929 m2) into a minimum of two smoke compart-
ments per story. The travel distance from any point in a smoke
compartment to a smoke barrier door shall not exceed 200 feet
(60 960 mm). The smoke barrier shall be installed in accor-
dance with Section 710.
422.3 Refuge area. At least 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) per
nonambulatory patient shall be provided within the aggregate
area of corridors, patient rooms, treatment rooms, lounge or
dining areas and other low-hazard areas on each side of each
smoke barrier.
422.4 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be pro-
vided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barri-
ers without having to return through the smoke compartment
from which means of egress originated.
422.5 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler sys-
tems shall be provided for ambulatory care facilities in accor-
dance with Section 903.2.2.
422.6 Fire alarm systems. A fire alarm system shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 907.2.2.1.

SECTION 423
STORM SHELTERS

423.1 General. In addition to other applicable requirements in
this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance
with ICC-500.
423.1.1 Scope. This section applies to the construction of
storm shelters constructed as separate detached buildings or
constructed as safe rooms within buildings for the purpose
of providing safe refuge from storms that produce high
winds, such as tornados and hurricanes. Such structures
shall be designated to be hurricane shelters, tornado shel-
ters, or combined hurricane and tornado shelters.
423.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
STORM SHELTER. A building, structure or portions(s)
thereof, constructed in accordance with ICC 500 and desig-
nated for use during a severe wind storm event, such as a hurri-
cane or tornado.
Community storm shelter. A storm shelter not defined as a
“Residential Storm Shelter.”

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

77

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:18 PM

41

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

78

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

04_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:4)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:04:18 PM

42

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 5

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

SECTION 501
GENERAL

MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the
floor and ceiling of any story and in accordance with Section
505.

501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter control the height
and area of structures hereafter erected and additions to exist-
ing structures.
[F] 501.2 Address identification. New and existing buildings
shall be provided with approved address numbers or letters.
Each character shall be a minimum 4 inches (102 mm) high and
a minimum of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) wide. They shall be installed
on a contrasting background and be plainly visible from the
street or road fronting the property. Where access is by means
of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed
from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign
or means shall be used to identify the structure.

SECTION 502
DEFINITIONS

502.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
AREA, BUILDING. The area included within surrounding
exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of
vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with
surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such
areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof
or floor above.
BASEMENT. A story that is not a story above grade plane (see
“Story above grade plane” in Section 202).

The definition of “Basement” does not apply to the provi-
sions of Section 1612 for flood loads (see “Basement” in Sec-
tion 1612.2).
EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. An unoccupied, elevated plat-
form used exclusively for mechanical systems or industrial
process equipment, including the associated elevated walk-
ways, stairs, alternating tread devices and ladders necessary to
access the platform (see Section 505.5).
GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average
of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior
walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the
exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the
lowest points within the area between the building and the lot
line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from
the building, between the building and a point 6 feet (1829 mm)
from the building.
HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from grade
plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.

➡

SECTION 503
GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHT AND
AREA LIMITATIONS

503.1 General. The building height and area shall not exceed
the limits specified in Table 503 based on the type of construc-
tion as determined by Section 602 and the occupancies as
determined by Section 302 except as modified hereafter. Each
portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls com-
plying with Section 706 shall be considered to be a separate
building.
503.1.1 Special industrial occupancies. Buildings and
structures designed to house special industrial processes
that require large areas and unusual building heights to
accommodate craneways or special machinery and equip-
ment, including, among others, rolling mills; structural
metal fabrication shops and foundries; or the production
and distribution of electric, gas or steam power, shall be
exempt from the building height and area limitations of
Table 503.
503.1.2 Buildings on same lot. Two or more buildings on
the same lot shall be regulated as separate buildings or shall
be considered as portions of one building if the building
height of each building and the aggregate building area of
the buildings are within the limitations of Table 503 as mod-
ified by Sections 504 and 506. The provisions of this code
applicable to the aggregate building shall be applicable to
each building.
503.1.3 Type I construction. Buildings of Type I construc-
tion permitted to be of unlimited tabular building heights
and areas are not subject to the special requirements that
allow unlimited area buildings in Section 507 or unlimited
building height in Sections 503.1.1 and 504.3 or increased
building heights and areas for other types of construction.

SECTION 504
BUILDING HEIGHT

504.1 General. The building height permitted by Table 503
shall be increased in accordance with this section.
Exception: The building height of one-story aircraft han-
gars, aircraft paint hangars and buildings used for the manu-
facturing of aircraft shall not be limited if the building is
provided with an automatic fire-extinguishing system in
accordance with Chapter 9 and is entirely surrounded by
public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half
times the building height.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

79

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:24 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

TABLE 503
ALLOWABLE BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREASa
Building height limitations shown in feet above grade plane. Story limitations shown as stories above grade plane.
Building area limitations shown in square feet, as determined by the definition of “Area, building,” per story

TYPE I

TYPE II

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
TYPE III

A
UL

UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
1
21,000
UL
21,000
UL
UL
UL
UL
4
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL
UL

B
160

5
UL
11
UL
11
UL
11
UL
UL
UL
11
UL
5
UL
11
UL
11
UL
1
16,500
3
16,500
6
60,000
7
UL
4
UL
9
55,000
4
UL
4
UL
5
60,500
11
UL
11
UL
11
UL
11
UL
11
UL
11
48,000
11
79,000
5
35,500

A
65

3
15,500
3
15,500
3
15,500
3
15,500
UL
UL
5
37,500
3
26,500
4
25,000
5
37,500
1
11,000
2
11,000
4
26,500
5
37,500
3
37,500
4
19,000
2
15,000
2
15,000
3
26,500
4
21,500
4
24,000
4
24,000
4
UL
4
24,000
4
26,000
5
39,000
4
19,000

B
55

A
65

STORIES(S)
AREA (A)

2
8,500
2
9,500
2
9,500
2
9,500
UL
UL
3
23,000
2
14,500
2
15,500
3
23,000
1
7,000
1
7,000
2
14,000
3
17,500
3
23,000
3
10,000
1
11,000
1
10,000
2
13,000
2
12,500
4
16,000
4
16,000
4
UL
4
16,000
2
17,500
3
26,000
2
8,500

3
14,000
3
14,000
3
14,000
3
14,000
UL
UL
5
28,500
3
23,500
3
19,000
4
28,500
1
9,500
2
9,500
4
17,500
5
28,500
3
28,500
4
16,500
1
12,000
2
10,500
3
23,500
4
18,500
4
24,000
4
24,000
4
UL
4
24,000
3
26,000
4
39,000
3
14,000

B
55

2
8,500
2
9,500
2
9,500
2
9,500
UL
UL
3
19,000
2
14,500
2
12,000
3
18,000
1
7,000
1
7,000
2
13,000
3
17,500
3
19,000
3
10,000
NP
NP
1
7,500
2
13,000
2
12,500
4
16,000
4
16,000
4
UL
4
16,000
2
17,500
3
26,000
2
8,500

TYPE IV
HT
65

3
15,000
3
15,000
3
15,000
3
15,000
UL
UL
5
36,000
3
25,500
4
33,500
5
50,500
1
10,500
2
10,500
4
25,500
5
36,000
3
36,000
4
18,000
1
12,000
2
12,000
3
25,500
4
20,500
4
20,500
4
20,500
4
UL
4
20,500
4
25,500
5
38,500
4
18,000

TYPE V

A
50

2
11,500
2
11,500
2
11,500
2
11,500
UL
UL
3
18,000
1
18,500
2
14,000
3
21,000
1
7,500
1
7,500
2
10,000
3
18,000
3
18,000
3
10,500
1
9,500
2
7,500
1
18,500
3
14,000
3
12,000
3
12,000
3
UL
3
12,000
3
14,000
4
21,000
2
9,000

B
40

1
5,500
1
6,000
1
6,000
1
6,000
UL
UL
2
9,000
1
9,500
1
8,500
2
13,000
NP
NP
1
3,000
1
5,000
2
6,500
2
9,000
2
4,500
NP
NP
1
5,000
1
9,000
1
9,000
2
7,000
2
7,000
3
UL
2
7,000
1
9,000
2
13,500
1
5,500

HEIGHT(feet)

GROUP

A-1

A-2

A-3

A-4

A-5

B

E

F-1

F-2

H-1

H-2d

H-3d

H-4

H-5

I-1

I-2

I-3

I-4

M

R-1

R-2

R-3

R-4

S-1

S-2b, c

Uc

S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A
S
A

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
A = building area per story, S = stories above grade plane, UL = Unlimited, NP = Not permitted.
a. See the following sections for general exceptions to Table 503:
1. Section 504.2, Allowable building height and story increase due to automatic sprinkler system installation.
2. Section 506.2, Allowable building area increase due to street frontage.
3. Section 506.3, Allowable building area increase due to automatic sprinkler system installation.
4. Section 507, Unlimited area buildings.
b. For open parking structures, see Section 406.3.
c. For private garages, see Section 406.1.
d. See Section 415.5 for limitations.

80

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:25 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

504.2 Automatic sprinkler system increase. Where a build-
ing is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the value
specified in Table 503 for maximum building height is
increased by 20 feet (6096 mm) and the maximum number of
stories is increased by one. These increases are permitted in
addition to the building area increase in accordance with Sec-
tions 506.2 and 506.3. For Group R buildings equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, the value specified in Table
503 for maximum building height is increased by 20 feet (6096
mm) and the maximum number of stories is increased by one,
but shall not exceed 60 feet (18 288 mm) or four stories, respec-
tively.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings, or portions of buildings, classified as a
Group I-2 occupancy of Type IIB, III, IV or V con-
struction.
2. Buildings, or portions of buildings, classified as a
Group H-1, H-2, H-3 or H-5 occupancy.
3. Fire-resistance rating substitution in accordance
with Table 601, Note d.
504.3 Roof structures. Towers, spires, steeples and other roof
structures shall be constructed of materials consistent with the
required type of construction of the building except where
other construction is permitted by Section 1509.2.4. Such
structures shall not be used for habitation or storage. The struc-
tures shall be unlimited in height if of noncombustible materi-
als and shall not extend more than 20 feet (6096 mm) above the
allowable building height if of combustible materials (see
Chapter 15 for additional requirements).

SECTION 505
MEZZANINES

505.1 General. A mezzanine or mezzanines in compliance
with Section 505 shall be considered a portion of the story in
which it is contained. Such mezzanines shall not contribute to
either the building area or number of stories as regulated by
Section 503.1. The area of the mezzanine shall be included in
determining the fire area defined in Section 902. The clear
height above and below the mezzanine floor construction shall
not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm).
505.2 Area limitation. The aggregate area of a mezzanine or
mezzanines within a room shall not exceed one-third of the
floor area of that room or space in which they are located. The
enclosed portion of a room shall not be included in a determina-
tion of the floor area of the room in which the mezzanine is
located. In determining the allowable mezzanine area, the area
of the mezzanine shall not be included in the floor area of the
room.
Exceptions:
1. The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and
structures of Type I or II construction for special
industrial occupancies in accordance with Section
503.1.1 shall not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of
the room.

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

2. The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and
structures of Type I or II construction shall not exceed
one-half of the floor area of the room in buildings and
structures equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
t i o n 9 0 3 . 3 . 1 . 1 a n d a n a p p r o v e d em e r g e n c y
voice/alarm communication system in accordance
with Section 907.5.2.2.
505.3 Egress. Each occupant of a mezzanine shall have access
to at least two independent means of egress where the common
path of egress travel exceeds the limitations of Section 1014.3.
Where a stairway provides a means of exit access from a mez-
zanine, the maximum travel distance includes the distance trav-
eled on the stairway measured in the plane of the tread nosing.
Accessible means of egress shall be provided in accordance
with Section 1007.
Exception: A single means of egress shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 1015.1.
505.4 Openness. A mezzanine shall be open and unobstructed
to the room in which such mezzanine is located except for walls
not more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high, columns and posts.
Exceptions:
1. Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be
open to the room in which the mezzanines are located,
provided that the occupant load of the aggregate area
of the enclosed space does not exceed 10.
2. A mezzanine having two or more means of egress is
not required to be open to the room in which the mez-
zanine is located if at least one of the means of egress
provides direct access to an exit from the mezzanine
level.
3. Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be
open to the room in which the mezzanines are located,
provided that the aggregate floor area of the enclosed
space does not exceed 10 percent of the mezzanine
area.
4. In industrial facilities, mezzanines used for control
equipment are permitted to be glazed on all sides.
5. In occupancies other than Groups H and I, that are no
mo re than two s tor ies above grade p lane and
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, a mezza-
nine having two or more means of egress shall not be
required to be open to the room in which the mezza-
nine is located.
505.5 Equipment platforms. Equipment platforms in build-
ings shall not be considered as a portion of the floor below.
Such equipment platforms shall not contribute to either the
building area or the number of stories as regulated by Section
503.1. The area of the equipment platform shall not be included
in determining the fire area in accordance with Section 903.
Equipment platforms shall not be a part of any mezzanine and
such platforms and the walkways, stairs, alternating tread
devices and ladders providing access to an equipment platform
shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from the build-
ing.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

81

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:25 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

505.5.1 Area limitations. The aggregate area of all equip-
ment platforms within a room shall not exceed two-thirds of
the area of the room in which they are located. Where an
equipment platform is located in the same room as a mezza-
nine, the area of the mezzanine shall be determined by Sec-
tion 505.2 and the combined aggregate area of
the
equipment platforms and mezzanines shall not exceed
two-thirds of the room in which they are located.
[F] 505.5.2 Fire suppression. Where located in a building
that is required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler
system, equipment platforms shall be fully protected by
sprinklers above and below the platform, where required by
the standards referenced in Section 903.3.
505.5.3 Guards. Equipment platforms shall have guards
where required by Section 1013.1.

SECTION 506
BUILDING AREA MODIFICATIONS

506.1 General. The building areas limited by Table 503 shall
be permitted to be increased due to frontage (If) and automatic
sprinkler system protection (Is) in accordance with the follow-
ing:

A

a

=

{

A

t

+

[

A

t

´

I

f

] [

+

A

t

´

I

s

]

}

(Equation 5-1)

If

where:
Aa = Allowable building area per story (square feet).
At
= Tabular building area per story in accordance with
Table 503 (square feet).
= Area increase factor due to frontage as calculated in
accordance with Section 506.2.
= Area increase factor due to sprinkler protection as cal-
culated in accordance with Section 506.3.
506.2 Frontage increase. Every building shall adjoin or have
access to a public way to receive a building area increase for
frontage. Where a building has more than 25 percent of its per-
imeter on a public way or open space having a minimum width
of 20 feet (6096 mm), the frontage increase shall be determined
in accordance with the following:

Is

I

f

=

[

F P
/

-

0 25
.

]
W

/

30

(Equation 5-2)

where:
I f
= Area increase due to frontage.
F
= Building perimeter that fronts on a public way or open
space having 20 feet (6096 mm) open minimum width
(feet).
P
= Perimeter of entire building (feet).
W = Width of public way or open space (feet) in accordance
with Section 506.2.1.
506.2.1 Width limits. The value of W shall be at least 20
feet (6096 mm). Where the value of W varies along the per-
imeter of the building, the calculation performed in accor-
dance with Equation 5-2 shall be based on the weighted
average of each portion of exterior wall and open space

where the value of W is greater than or equal to 20 feet (6096
mm). Where the value of W exceeds 30 feet (9144 mm), a
value of 30 feet (9144 mm) shall be used in calculating the
weighted average, regardless of the actual width of the open
space. Where two or more buildings are on the same lot, W
shall be measured from the exterior face of a building to the
exterior face of an opposing building, as applicable.
Exception: The value of W divided by 30 shall be per-
mitted to be a maximum of 2 when the building meets all
requirements of Section 507 except for compliance with
the 60-foot (18 288 mm) public way or yard requirement,
as applicable.
506.2.2 Open space limits. Such open space shall be either
on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be
accessed from a street or approved fire lane.
506.3 Automatic sprinkler system increase. Where a build-
ing is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the building
area limitation in Table 503 is permitted to be increased by an
additional 200 percent (Is = 2) for buildings with more than one
story above grade plane and an additional 300 percent (Is = 3)
for buildings with no more than one story above grade plane.
These increases are permitted in addition to the height and
story increases in accordance with Section 504.2.
Exception: The building area limitation increases shall not
be permitted for the following conditions:
1. The automatic sprinkler system increase shall not
apply to buildings with an occupancy in Group H-1.
2. The automatic sprinkler system increase shall not
apply to the building area of an occupancy in Group
H-2 or H-3. For buildings containing such occupan-
cies, the allowable building area shall be determined
in accordance with Section 508.4.2, with the sprinkler
system increase applicable only to the portions of the
building not classified as Group H-2 or H-3.
3. Fire-resistance rating substitution in accordance
with Table 601, Note d.
506.4 Single occupancy buildings with more than one story.
The total allowable building area of a single occupancy build-
ing with more than one story above grade plane shall be deter-
mined in accordance with this section. The actual aggregate
building area at all stories in the building shall not exceed the
total allowable building area.
Exception: A single basement need not be included in the
total allowable building area, provided such basement does
not exceed the area permitted for a building with no more
than one story above grade plane.

506.4.1 Area determination. The total allowable building
area of a single occupancy building with more than one
story above grade plane shall be determined by multiplying
the allowable building area per story (Aa), as determined in
Section 506.1, by the number of stories above grade plane
as listed below:
1. For buildings with two stories above grade plane,
multiply by 2;

82

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:26 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. For buildings with three or more stories above grade
plane, multiply by 3; and
3. No story shall exceed the allowable building area per
story (Aa), as determined in Section 506.1, for the
occupancies on that story.
Exceptions:
1. Unlimited area buildings in accordance with Sec-
tion 507.
2. The max imum a rea o f a bu i ld ing equ ipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be deter-
mined by multiplying the allowable area per story
(Aa), as determined in Section 506.1, by the num-
ber of stories above grade plane.

506.5 Mixed occupancy area determination. The total allow-
able building area for buildings containing mixed occupancies
shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provi-
sions of this section. A single basement need not be included in
the total allowable building area, provided such basement does
not exceed the area permitted for a building with no more than
one story above grade plane.

506.5.1 No more than one story above grade plane. For
buildings with no more than one story above grade plane
and containing mixed occupancies, the total building area
shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provi-
sions of Section 508.1.
506.5.2 More than one story above grade plane. For
buildings with more than one story above grade plane and
containing mixed occupancies, each story shall individually
comply with the applicable requirements of Section 508.1.
For buildings with more than three stories above grade
plane, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate
sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by
the allowable area of such stories based on the applicable
provisions of Section 508.1 shall not exceed 3.

SECTION 507
UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS

507.1 General. The area of buildings of the occupancies and
configurations specified herein shall not be limited.
507.2 Nonsprinklered, one story. The area of a Group F-2 or
S-2 building no more than one story in height shall not be lim-
ited when the building is surrounded and adjoined by public
ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.
507.3 Sprinklered, one story. The area of a Group B, F, M or S
building no more than one story above grade plane, or a Group
A-4 building no more than one story above grade plane of other
than Type V construction, shall not be limited when the build-
ing is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and
adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288
mm) in width.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings and structures of Types I and II construc-
tion for rack storage facilities that do not have access

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

by the public shall not be limited in height, provided
that such buildings conform to the requirements of
Sections 507.3, 903.3.1.1 and Chapter 23 of the Inter-
national Fire Code.
2. The automatic sprinkler system shall not be required
in areas occupied for indoor participant sports, such
as tennis, skating, swimming and equestrian activities
in occupancies in Group A-4, provided that:
2.1. Exit doors directly to the outside are provided
for occupants of the participant sports areas;
and
2.2. The building is equipped with a fire alarm sys-
tem with manual fire alarm boxes installed in
accordance with Section 907.
507.3.1 Mixed occupancy buildings with Groups A-1
and A-2. Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies of other than
Type V construction shall be permitted within mixed occu-
pancy buildings of unlimited area complying with Section
507.3, provided:
1. Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies are separated from
other occupancies as required for separated occupan-
cies in Section 508.4.4 with no reduction allowed in
the fire-resistance rating of the separation based upon
the installation of an automatic sprinkler system;
2. Each area of the portions of the building used for
Group A-1 or A-2 occupancies shall not exceed the
maximum allowable area permitted for such occu-
pancies in Section 503.1; and
3. All exit doors from Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies
shall discharge directly to the exterior of the building.
507.4 Two story. The area of a Group B, F, M or S building no
more than two stories above grade plane shall not be limited
when the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is
surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than
60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.
507.5 Reduced open space. The public ways or yards of 60
feet (18 288 mm) in width required in Sections 507.2, 507.3,
507.4, 507.6 and 507.11 shall be permitted to be reduced to not
less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in width provided all of the fol-
lowing requirements are met:
1. The reduced width shall not be allowed for more than 75
percent of the perimeter of the building.
2. The exterior walls facing the reduced width shall have a
minimum fire-resistance rating of 3 hours.
3. Openings in the exterior walls facing the reduced width
shall have opening protectives with a minimum fire pro-
tection rating of 3 hours.

507.6 Group A-3 buildings of Type II construction. The area
of a Group A-3 building no more than one story above grade
plane, used as a place of religious worship, community hall,
dance hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor
swimming pool or tennis court of Type II construction, shall
not be limited when all of the following criteria are met:
1. The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

83

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:26 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

2. The building shall be equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1.
3. The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public
ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.7 Group A-3 buildings of Types III and IV construc-
tion. The area of a Group A-3 building no more than one story
above grade plane, used as a place of religious worship, com-
munity hall, dance hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture
hall, indoor swimming pool or tennis court of Type III or IV
construction, shall not be limited when all of the following cri-
teria are met:

1. The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.
2. The building shall be equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1.
3. The assembly floor shall be located at or within 21 inches
(533 mm) of street or grade level and all exits are pro-
vided with ramps complying with Section 1010.1 to the
street or grade level.
4. The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public
ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.8 Group H occupancies. Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occu-
pancies shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings contain-
ing Group F and S occupancies, in accordance with Sections
507.3 and 507.4 and the limitations of this section. The aggre-
gate floor area of the Group H occupancies located at the per-
imeter of the unlimited area building shall not exceed 10
percent of the area of the building nor the area limitations for
the Group H occupancies as specified in Table 503 as modified
by Section 506.2, based upon the percentage of the perimeter
of each Group H floor area that fronts on a street or other unoc-
cupied space. The aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies
not located at the perimeter of the building shall not exceed 25
percent of the area limitations for the Group H occupancies as
specified in Table 503. Group H occupancies shall be separated
from the rest of the unlimited area building and from each other
in accordance with Table 508.4. For two-story unlimited area
buildings, the Group H occupancies shall not be located more
than one story above grade plane unless permitted by the
allowable height in stories and feet as set forth in Table 503
based on the type of construction of the unlimited area build-
ing.

507.9 Aircraft paint hangar. The area of a Group H-2 aircraft
paint hangar no more than one story above grade plane shall
not be limited where such aircraft paint hangar complies with
the provisions of Section 412.6 and is surrounded and adjoined
by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half
times the building height.

507.10 Group E buildings. The area of a Group E building no
more than one story above grade plane, of Type II, IIIA or IV
construction, shall not be limited when all of the following cri-
teria are met:

1. Each classroom shall have not less than two means of
egress, with one of the means of egress being a direct exit

to the outside of the building complying with Section
1020.
2. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
3. The building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways
or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.
507.11 Motion picture theaters. In buildings of Type II con-
struction, the area of a motion picture theater located on the
first story above grade plane shall not be limited when the
building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system
throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is sur-
rounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60
feet (18 288 mm) in width.
507.12 Covered mall buildings and anchor stores. The area

of covered mall buildings and anchor stores not exceeding
three stories in height that comply with Section 402.6 shall not
be limited.

SECTION 508
MIXED USE AND OCCUPANCY

508.1 General. Each portion of a building shall be individually
classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Where a building
contains more than one occupancy group, the building or por-
tion thereof shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sec-
tion 508.2, 508.3 or 508.4, or a combination of these sections.
Exceptions:
1. Occupancies separated in accordance with Section
509.
2. Where required by Table 415.3.2, areas of Group
H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be located in a
separate and detached building or structure.
3. Uses within live/work units, complying with Section
419, are not considered separate occupancies.
508.2 Accessory occupancies. Accessory occupancies are
those occupancies that are ancillary to the main occupancy of
the building or portion thereof. Accessory occupancies shall
comply with the provisions of Sections 508.2.1 through
508.2.5.3.
508.2.1 Area limitations. Aggregate accessory occupan-
cies shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the building
area of the story in which they are located and shall not
exceed the tabular values in Table 503, without building
area increases in accordance with Section 506 for such
accessory occupancies.
508.2.2 Occupancy classification. Accessory occupancies
shall be individually classified in accordance with Section
302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each por-
tion of the building based on the occupancy classification of
that space.
508.2.3 Allowable building area and height. The allow-
able building area and height of the building shall be based
on the allowable building area and height for the main occu-
pancy in accordance with Section 503.1. The height of each
accessory occupancy shall not exceed the tabular values in

84

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:27 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

Table 503, without increases in accordance with Section
504 for such accessory occupancies. The building area of
the accessory occupancies shall be in accordance with Sec-
tion 508.2.1.
508.2.4 Separation of occupancies. No separation is
required between accessory occupancies and the main
occupancy.
Exceptions:
1. Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be
separated from all other occupancies in accor-
dance with Section 508.4.
2. Incidental accessory occupancies required to be
separated or protected by Section 508.2.5.
3. Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and
sleeping units shall be separated from other dwell-
ing or sleeping units and from accessory occupan-
cies contiguous to them in accordance with the
requirements of Section 420.
508.2.5 Separation of incidental accessory occupancies.
The incidental accessory occupancies listed in Table

508.2.5 shall be separated from the remainder of the
building or equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing
system, or both, in accordance with Table 508.2.5.
Exception: Incidental accessory occupancies within and
serving a dwelling unit are not required to comply with
this section.
508.2.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated separation. Where
Table 508.2.5 specifies a fire-resistance-rated separa-
tion, the incidental accessory occupancies shall be sepa-
rated from the remainder of the building by a fire barrier
constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizon-
tal assembly constructed in accordance with Section
712, or both. Construction supporting 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated fire barriers or horizontal assemblies used
for incidental accessory occupancy separations in build-
ings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction are not
required to be fire-resistance rated unless required by
other sections of this code.
508.2.5.2 Nonfire-resistance-rated separation and
protection. Where Table 508.2.5 permits an automatic
fire-extinguishing system without a fire barrier, the inci-

TABLE 508.2.5
INCIDENTAL ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES

ROOM OR AREA

SEPARATION AND/OR PROTECTION

Furnace room where any piece of equipment is over 400,000 Btu per
hour input

Rooms with boilers where the largest piece of equipment is over 15
psi and 10 horsepower

1 hour or provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

1 hour or provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

Refrigerant machinery room

1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system

Hydrogen cutoff rooms, not classified as Group H

1 hour in Group B, F, M, S and U occupancies; 2 hours in Group A,
E, I and R occupancies.

Incinerator rooms

2 hours and automatic sprinkler system

Paint shops, not classified as Group H, located in occupancies other
than Group F

Laboratories and vocational shops, not classified as Group H, located
in a Group E or I-2 occupancy

2 hours; or 1 hour and provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

1 hour or provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

Laundry rooms over 100 square feet

1 hour or provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

Group I-3 cells equipped with padded surfaces

Group I-2 waste and linen collection rooms

1 hour

1 hour

Waste and linen collection rooms over 100 square feet

1 hour or provide automatic fire-extinguishing system

Stationary storage battery systems having a liquid electrolyte
capacity of more than 50 gallons, or a lithium-ion capacity of 1,000
pounds used for facility standby power, emergency power or
uninterrupted power supplies

1 hour in Group B, F, M, S and U occupancies; 2 hours in Group A,
E, I and R occupancies.

Rooms containing fire pumps in nonhigh-rise buildings

2 hours; or 1 hour and provide automatic sprinkler system throughout
the building

Rooms containing fire pumps in high-rise buildings

2 hours

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square inch (psi) = 6.9 kPa, 1 British thermal unit (Btu) per hour = 0.293 watts, 1 horsepower = 746 watts,
1 gallon = 3.785 L.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

85

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:27 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

dental accessory occupancies shall be separated from the
remainder of the building by construction capable of
resisting the passage of smoke. The walls shall extend
from the top of the foundation or floor assembly below to
the underside of the ceiling that is a component of a
fire-resistance-rated floor assembly or roof assembly
above or to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing,
deck or slab above. Doors shall be self- or automatic-
closing upon detection of smoke in accordance with Sec-
tion 715.4.8.3. Doors shall not have air transfer openings
and shall not be undercut in excess of the clearance per-
mitted in accordance with NFPA 80. Walls surrounding
the incidental accessory occupancy shall not have air
transfer openings unless provided with smoke dampers
in accordance with Section 711.7.

508.2.5.3 Protection. Except as specified in Table
508.2.5 for certain incidental accessory occupancies,
where an automatic fire-extinguishing system or an
automatic sprinkler system is provided in accordance
with Table 508.2.5, only the space occupied by the inci-
dental accessory occupancy need be equipped with such
a system.

508.3 Nonseparated occupancies. Buildings or portions of
buildings that comply with the provisions of this section shall
be considered as nonseparated occupancies.

508.3.1 Occupancy classification. Nonseparated occupan-
cies shall be individually classified in accordance with Sec-
tion 302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each
portion of the building based on the occupancy classifica-

tion of that space except that the most restrictive applicable
provisions of Section 403 and Chapter 9 shall apply to the
building or portion thereof in which the nonseparated occu-
pancies are located.

508.3.2 Allowable building area and height. The allow-
able building area and height of the building or portion
thereof shall be based on the most restrictive allowances for
the occupancy groups under consideration for the type of
construction of the building in accordance with Section
503.1.

508.3.3 Separation. No separation is required between
nonseparated occupancies.

Exceptions:
1. Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be
separated from all other occupancies in accor-
dance with Section 508.4.
2. Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and
sleeping units shall be separated from other dwell-
ing or sleeping units and from other occupancies
contiguous to them in accordance with the require-
ments of Section 420.
508.4 Separated occupancies. Buildings or portions of build-
ings that comply with the provisions of this section shall be
considered as separated occupancies.

508.4.1 Occupancy classification. Separated occupancies
shall be individually classified in accordance with Section
302.1. Each separated space shall comply with this code

TABLE 508.4
REQUIRED SEPARATION OF OCCUPANCIES (HOURS)

OCCUPANCY

Ad, E
NS

S

I-1, I-3, I-4

I-2

R

S

NS

S

NS

S

NS

F-2, S-2b, U
S
NS

B, F-1, M, S-1

H-1

H-2

H-3, H-4, H-5

S

NS

S

NS

S

NS

S

NS

3a
NP
NP
NP
3a

2a

NP
NP
NP

Ad, E
N
N
1
2
2
NP
1
2
N
I-1, I-3, I-4 — — N
N
2
NP
1
NP
1
I-2
— — — — N
N
2
NP
2
R
— — — — — — N
N
1c
F-2, S-2b, U — — — — — — — — N
B, F-1, M,
S-1
H-1
— — — — — — — — — — — — N
NP
NP
NP
NP
H-2
— — — — — — — — — — — — — — N
NP
1
H-3, H-4, H-5 — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 1e, f

— — — — — — — — — — N

NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

4
NP
NP
NP
4

1
2
NP
2c
N

2
2
NP
2
2

N

NP

NP

3

2
2
2
2
2

1

3
3
3
3
3

2

1
1
2
1
1

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
S
= Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
N = No separation requirement.
NP = Not permitted.
a. For Group H-5 occupancies, see Section 903.2.5.2.
b. The required separation from areas used only for private or pleasure vehicles shall be reduced by 1 hour but to not less than 1 hour.
c. See Section 406.1.4.
d. Commercial kitchens need not be separated from the restaurant seating areas that they serve.
e. Separation is not required between occupancies of the same classification.
f. For H-5 occupancies, see Section 415.8.2.2.

➡

86

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:28 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

based on the occupancy classification of that portion of the
building.
508.4.2 Allowable building area. In each story, the build-
ing area shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual
building area of each separated occupancy divided by the
allowable building area of each separated occupancy shall
not exceed 1.
508.4.3 Allowable height. Each separated occupancy shall
comply with the building height limitations based on the
type of construction of the building in accordance with Sec-
tion 503.1.
Exception: Special provisions permitted by Section
509.
508.4.4 Separation. Individual occupancies shall be sepa-
rated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with Table
508.4.
508.4.4.1 Construction. Required separations shall be
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707
or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with
Section 712, or both, so as to completely separate adja-
cent occupancies.

SECTION 509
SPECIAL PROVISIONS

509.1 General. The provisions in this section shall permit the
use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the
specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable
heights and areas of buildings based on the occupancy classifi-
cation and type of construction, provided the special condition
complies with the provisions specified in this section for such
condition and other applicable requirements of this code. The
provisions of Sections 509.2 through 509.8 are to be consid-
ered independent and separate from each other.
509.2 Horizontal building separation allowance. A building
shall be considered as separate and distinct buildings for the
purpose of determining area limitations, continuity of fire
walls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction
where all of the following conditions are met:
1. The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly
having a minimum 3-hour fire-resistance rating.
2. The building below the horizontal assembly is no more
than one story above grade plane.
3. The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type
IA construction.
4. Shaft, stairway, ramp and escalator enclosures through
the horizontal assembly shall have not less than a 2-hour
fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accor-
dance with Section 715.4.
Exception: Where the enclosure walls below the hor-
izontal assembly have not less than a 3-hour fire-resis-
tance rating with opening protectives in accordance
with Section 715.4, the enclosure walls extending

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to
have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, provided:
1. The building above the horizontal assembly is
not required to be of Type I construction;
2. The enclosure connects less than four stories;
and
3. The enclosure opening protectives above the
horizontal assembly have a minimum 1-hour
fire protection rating.
5. The building or buildings above the horizontal assembly
shall be permitted to have multiple Group A occupancy
uses, each with an occupant load of less than 300, or
Group B, M, R or S occupancies.
6. The building below the horizontal assembly shall be pro-
tected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and shall
be permitted to be any of the following occupancies:
6.1. Group S-2 parking garage used for the parking
and storage of private motor vehicles;
6.2. Multiple Group A, each with an occupant load of
less than 300;
6.3. Group B;
6.4. Group M;
6.5. Group R; and
6.6. Uses incidental to the operation of the building
(including entry lobbies, mechanical rooms,
storage areas and similar uses).
7. The maximum building height in feet (mm) shall not
exceed the limits set forth in Section 503 for the building
having the smaller allowable height as measured from
the grade plane.

509.3 Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with Group S-2
open parking garage above. A Group S-2 enclosed parking
garage with no more than one story above grade plane and
located below a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be classi-
fied as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of deter-
mining the type of construction where all of the following
conditions are met:
1. The allowable area of the building shall be such that the
sum of the ratios of the actual area divided by the allow-
able area for each separate occupancy shall not exceed 1.
2. The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is of Type I or II
construction and is at least equal to the fire-resistance
requirements of the Group S-2 open parking garage .
3. The height and the number of tiers of the Group S-2 open
parking garage shall be limited as specified in Table
406.3.5.
4. The floor assembly separating the Group S-2 enclosed
parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage shall
be protected as required for the floor assembly of the
Group S-2 enclosed parking garage. Openings between
the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

87

05_ibc_2009pg87.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:27:34 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

open parking garage, except exit openings, shall not be
required to be protected.
5. The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is used exclu-
sively for the parking or storage of private motor vehi-
cles, but shall be permitted to contain an office, waiting
room and toilet room having a total area of not more than
1,000 square feet (93 m2), and mechanical equipment
rooms incidental to the operation of the building.
509.4 Parking beneath Group R. Where a maximum one
story above grade plane Group S-2 parking garage, enclosed or
open, or combination thereof, of Type I construction or open of
Type IV construction, with grade entrance, is provided under a
building of Group R, the number of stories to be used in deter-
mining the minimum type of construction shall be measured
from the floor above such a parking area. The floor assembly
between the parking garage and the Group R above shall com-
ply with the type of construction required for the parking
garage and shall also provide a fire-resistance rating not less
than the mixed occupancy separation required in Section
508.4.
509.5 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIIA construc-
tion. The height limitation for buildings of Type IIIA construc-
tion in Groups R-1 and R-2 shall be increased to six stories and
75 feet (22 860 mm) where the first floor assembly above the
basement has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours
and the floor area is subdivided by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated
fire walls into areas of not more than 3,000 square feet (279
m2).
509.6 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIA construc-
tion. The height limitation for buildings of Type IIA construc-
tion in Groups R-1 and R-2 shall be increased to nine stories
and 100 feet (30 480 mm) where the building is separated by
not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from any other building on
the lot and from lot lines, the exits are segregated in an area
enclosed by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire wall and the first
floor assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 11/2
hours.
509.7 Open parking garage beneath Groups A, I, B, M and
R. Open parking garages constructed under Groups A, I, B, M
and R shall not exceed the height and area limitations permitted
under Section 406.3. The height and area of the portion of the
building above the open parking garage shall not exceed the
limitations in Section 503 for the upper occupancy. The height,
in both feet and stories, of the portion of the building above the
open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and
shall include both the open parking garage and the portion of
the building above the parking garage.
509.7.1 Fire separation. Fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712 between the
parking occupancy and the upper occupancy shall corre-
spond to the required fire-resistance rating prescribed in
Table 508.4 for the uses involved. The type of construction
shall apply to each occupancy individually, except that
structural members, including main bracing within the open
parking structure, which is necessary to support the upper
occupancy, shall be protected with the more restrictive
fire-resistance-rated assemblies of the groups involved as

shown in Table 601. Means of egress for the upper occu-
pancy shall conform to Chapter 10 and shall be separated
from the parking occupancy by fire barriers having at least a
2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 706
with self-closing doors complying with Section 715 or hori-
zontal assemblies having at least a 2-hour fire-resistance
rating as required by Section 712, with self-closing doors
complying with Section 715. Means of egress from the open
parking garage shall comply with Section 406.3.
509.8 Group B or M with Group S-2 open parking garage.
Group B or M occupancies located no higher than the first story
above grade plane shall be considered as a separate and distinct
building for the purpose of determining the type of construc-
tion where all of the following conditions are met:
1. The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly
having a minimum 2-hour fire-resistance rating.
2. The occupancies in the building below the horizontal
assembly are limited to Groups B and M.
3. The occupancy above the horizontal assembly is limited
to a Group S-2 open parking garage .
4. The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type I
or II construction but not less than the type of construc-
tion required for the Group S-2 open parking garage
above.
5. The height and area of the building below the horizontal
assembly does not exceed the limits set forth in Section
503.
6. The height and area of the Group S-2 open parking
garage does not exceed the limits set forth in Section
406.3. The height, in both feet and stories, of the Group
S-2 open parking garage shall be measured from grade
plane and shall include the building below the horizontal
assembly.
7. Exits serving the Group S-2 open parking garage dis-
charge directly to a street or public way and are separated
from the building below the horizontal assembly by
2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both.
509.9 Multiple buildings above Group S-2 parking garages.
Where two or more buildings are provided above the horizon-
tal assembly separating a Group S-2 open or closed parking
garage from the buildings above in accordance with the special
provisions in Sections 509.2, 509.3 or 509.8, the buildings
above the horizontal assembly shall be regarded as separate
and distinct buildings from each other and shall comply with all
other provisions of this code as applicable to each separate and
distinct building.

88

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

05_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:5)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:33:28 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 6

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

SECTION 601
GENERAL

601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
classification of buildings as to type of construction.

SECTION 602
CONSTRUCTION CLASSIFICATION

602.1 General. Buildings and structures erected or to be
erected, altered or extended in height or area shall be classified
in one of the five construction types defined in Sections 602.2
through 602.5. The building elements shall have a fire-resis-
tance rating not less than that specified in Table 601 and exte-
rior walls shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than that
specified in Table 602. Where required to have a fire-resistance
rating by Table 601, building elements shall comply with the
applicable provisions of Section 703.2. The protection of open-
ings, ducts and air transfer openings in building elements shall
not be required unless required by other provisions of this code.

602.1.1 Minimum requirements. A building or portion
thereof shall not be required to conform to the details of a
type of construction higher than that type which meets the
minimum requirements based on occupancy even though
certain features of such a building actually conform to a
higher type of construction.
602.2 Types I and II. Types I and II construction are those
types of construction in which the building elements listed in
Table 601 are of noncombustible materials, except as permitted
in Section 603 and elsewhere in this code.
602.3 Type III. Type III construction is that type of construc-
tion in which the exterior walls are of noncombustible materi-
als and the interior building elements are of any material
permitted by this code. Fire-retardant-treated wood framing
complying with Section 2303.2 shall be permitted within exte-
rior wall assemblies of a 2-hour rating or less.
602.4 Type IV. Type IV construction (Heavy Timber, HT) is
that type of construction in which the exterior walls are of
noncombustible materials and the interior building elements
are of solid or laminated wood without concealed spaces. The

TABLE 601
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ELEMENTS (hours)

TYPE I

TYPE II

TYPE III

TYPE IV

TYPE V

BUILDING  ELEMENT

Primary structural frameg
(see Section 202)

Bearing walls
Exteriorf, g
Interior

Nonbearing walls and partitions
Exterior

Nonbearing walls and partitions
Interiore

Floor construction and secondary
members (see Section 202)

Roof construction and secondary
members (see Section 202)

A

3a

3
3a

0

2

B

2a

2
2a

0

2

Ad

1

1
1

0

1

B

0

0
0

0

0

b

11/2

1b, c

1b, c

0 c

1b, c

Ad

1

2
1

B

0

2
0

See Table 602

HT

HT

2
1/HT

0

1

0

0

0

See Section 602.4.6

HT

HT

Ad

1

1
1

0

1

1b, c

B

0

0
0

0

0

0

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Roof supports: Fire-resistance ratings of primary structural frame and bearing walls are permitted to be reduced by 1 hour where supporting a roof only.
b. Except in Group F-1, H, M and S-1 occupancies, fire protection of structural members shall not be required, including protection of roof framing and decking
where every part of the roof construction is 20 feet or more above any floor immediately below. Fire-retardant-treated wood members shall be allowed to be used
for such unprotected members.
c. In all occupancies, heavy timber shall be allowed where a 1-hour or less fire-resistance rating is required.
d. An approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be allowed to be substituted for 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, pro-
vided such system is not otherwise required by other provisions of the code or used for an allowable area increase in accordance with Section 506.3 or an allowable
height increase in accordance with Section 504.2. The 1-hour substitution for the fire resistance of exterior walls shall not be permitted.
e. Not less than the fire-resistance rating required by other sections of this code.
f. Not less than the fire-resistance rating based on fire separation distance (see Table 602).
g. Not less than the fire-resistance rating as referenced in Section 704.10

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

89

06_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:6)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:49:04 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

details of Type IV construction shall comply with the provi-
sions of this section. Fire-retardant-treated wood framing
complying with Section 2303.2 shall be permitted within exte-
rior wall assemblies with a 2-hour rating or less. Minimum
solid sawn nominal dimensions are required for structures built
using Type IV construction (HT). For glued-laminated mem-
bers the equivalent net finished width and depths correspond-
ing to the minimum nominal width and depths of solid sawn
lumber are required as specified in Table 602.4.
602.4.1 Columns. Wood columns shall be sawn or glued
laminated and shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm),
nominal, in any dimension where supporting floor loads and
not less than 6 inches (152 mm) nominal in width and not
less than 8 inches (203 mm) nominal in depth where sup-
porting roof and ceiling loads only. Columns shall be con-
tinuous or superimposed and connected in an approved
manner.
602.4.2 Floor framing. Wood beams and girders shall be of
sawn or glued-laminated timber and shall be not less than 6
inches (152 mm) nominal in width and not less than 10
inches (254 mm) nominal
in depth. Framed sawn or
glued-laminated timber arches, which spring from the floor
line and support floor loads, shall be not less than 8 inches
(203 mm) nominal in any dimension. Framed timber trusses

supporting floor loads shall have members of not less than 8
inches (203 mm) nominal in any dimension.
602.4.3 Roof framing. Wood-frame or glued-laminated
arches for roof construction, which spring from the floor
line or from grade and do not support floor loads, shall have
members not less than 6 inches (152 mm) nominal in width
and have not less than 8 inches (203 mm) nominal in depth
for the lower half of the height and not less than 6 inches
(152 mm) nominal in depth for the upper half. Framed or
glued-laminated arches for roof construction that spring
from the top of walls or wall abutments, framed timber
trusses and other roof framing, which do not support floor
loads, shall have members not less than 4 inches (102 mm)
nominal in width and not less than 6 inches (152 mm) nomi-
nal in depth. Spaced members shall be permitted to be com-
posed of two or more pieces not less than 3 inches (76 mm)
nominal in thickness where blocked solidly throughout
their intervening spaces or where spaces are tightly closed
by a continuous wood cover plate of not less than 2 inches
(51 mm) nominal in thickness secured to the underside of
the members. Splice plates shall be not less than 3 inches (76
mm) nominal in thickness. Where protected by approved
automatic sprinklers under the roof deck, framing members
shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in width.

TABLE 602
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTERIOR WALLS BASED ON FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCEa, e

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE = X
(feet)

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

OCCUPANCY
GROUP Hf

OCCUPANCY
GROUP F-1, M, S-1g

OCCUPANCY
GROUP A, B, E, F-2, I, R, S-2g, Ub

X < 5c

5 £ X <10

10 £ X < 30

X ³ 30

All

IA
Others

IA, IB
IIB, VB
Others

All

3

3
2

2
1
1

0

2

2
1

1
0
1

0

1

1
1

1d
0
1d

0

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Load-bearing exterior walls shall also comply with the fire-resistance rating requirements of Table 601.
b. For special requirements for Group U occupancies, see Section 406.1.2.
c. See Section 706.1.1 for party walls.
d. Open parking garages complying with Section 406 shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.
e. The fire-resistance rating of an exterior wall is determined based upon the fire separation distance of the exterior wall and the story in which the wall is located.
f. For special requirements for Group H occupancies, see Section 415.3.
g. For special requirements for Group S aircraft hangars, see Section 412.4.1.

MINIMUM NOMINAL SOLID SAWN SIZE

MINIMUM GLUED-LAMINATED NET SIZE

Width, inch

Depth, inch

Width, inch

Depth, inch

TABLE 602.4
WOOD MEMBER SIZE

8

6

6

6

4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

90

8

10

8

6

6

6 3/4
5

5

5

3

81/4
101/2
81/4
6
6 7/8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

06_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:6)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:49:05 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

602.4.4 Floors. Floors shall be without concealed spaces.
Wood floors shall be of sawn or glued-laminated planks,
splined or tongue-and-groove, of not less than 3 inches (76
mm) nominal in thickness covered with 1-inch (25 mm)
nominal dimension tongue-and-groove flooring, laid cross-
wise or diagonally, or 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) particleboard or
planks not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in width set
on edge close together and well spiked and covered with
1-inch (25 mm) nominal dimension flooring or 15/32-inch
(12 mm) wood structural panel or 0.5-inch (12.7 mm)
particleboard. The lumber shall be laid so that no continu-
ous line of joints will occur except at points of support.
Floors shall not extend closer than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) to
walls. Such 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) space shall be covered by a
molding fastened to the wall and so arranged that it will not
obstruct the swelling or shrinkage movements of the floor.
Corbeling of masonry walls under the floor shall be permit-
ted to be used in place of molding.
602.4.5 Roofs. Roofs shall be without concealed spaces and
wood roof decks shall be sawn or glued laminated, splined
or tongue-and-groove plank, not less than 2 inches (51 mm)
nominal in thickness, 11/8-inch-thick (32 mm) wood struc-
tural panel (exterior glue), or of planks not less than 3 inches
(76 mm) nominal in width, set on edge close together and
laid as required for floors. Other types of decking shall be
permitted to be used if providing equivalent fire resistance
and structural properties.
602.4.6 Partitions. Partitions shall be of solid wood con-
struction formed by not less than two layers of 1-inch (25
mm) matched boards or laminated construction 4 inches
(102 mm) thick, or of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construc-
tion.
602.4.7 Exterior structural members. Where a horizontal
separation of 20 feet (6096 mm) or more is provided, wood
columns and arches conforming to heavy timber sizes shall
be permitted to be used externally.
602.5 Type V. Type V construction is that type of construction
in which the structural elements, exterior walls and interior
walls are of any materials permitted by this code.

SECTION 603
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL IN TYPE I
AND II CONSTRUCTION

603.1 Allowable materials. Combustible materials shall be
permitted in buildings of Type I or II construction in the follow-
ing applications and in accordance with Sections 603.1.1
through 603.1.3:
1. Thermal and acoustical insulation, other than foam
plastics, having a flame spread index of not more than
25.
Exceptions:
1. In su la t ion p laced be tween two laye r s o f
noncombustible materials without an interven-
ing airspace shall be allowed to have a flame
spread index of not more than 100.

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

2. Insulation installed between a finished floor
and solid decking without intervening airspace
shall be allowed to have a flame spread index of
not more than 200.
2. Foam plastics in accordance with Chapter 26.
3. Roof coverings that have an A, B or C classification.
4. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials
installed in accordance with Section 804.
5. Millwork such as doors, door frames, window sashes
and frames.
6. Interior wall and ceiling finishes installed in accor-
dance with Sections 801 and 803.
7. Trim installed in accordance with Section 806.
8. Where not installed over 15 feet (4572 mm) above
grade, show windows, nailing or furring strips and
wooden bulkheads below show windows, including
their frames, aprons and show cases.
9. Finish flooring installed in accordance with Section
805.
10. Partitions dividing portions of stores, offices or similar
places occupied by one tenant only and that do not
establish a corridor serving an occupant load of 30 or
more shall be permitted to be constructed of fire-retar-
dant-treated wood, 1-hour fire-resistance-rated con-
struction or of wood panels or similar light construction
up to 6 feet (1829 mm) in height.
11. Stages and platforms constructed in accordance with
Sections 410.3 and 410.4, respectively.
12. Combustible exterior wall coverings, balconies and
similar projections and bay or oriel windows in accor-
dance with Chapter 14.
13. Blocking such as for handrails, millwork, cabinets and
window and door frames.
14. Light-transmitting plastics as permitted by Chapter 26.
15. Mastics and caulking materials applied to provide flex-
ible seals between components of exterior wall con-
struction.
16. Exterior plastic veneer installed in accordance with
Section 2605.2.
17. Nailing or furring strips as permitted by Section 803.4.
18. Heavy timber as permitted by Note c to Table 601 and
Sections 602.4.7 and 1406.3.
19. Aggregates, component materials and admixtures as
permitted by Section 703.2.2.
20. Sprayed fire-resistant materials and intumescent and
mastic fire-resistant coatings, determined on the basis
of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section
703 .2 and installed in accordance with Sections
1704.12 and 1704.13, respectively.
21. Materials used to protect penetrations in fire-resis-
tance-rated assemblies in accordance with Section 713.
22. Materials used to protect joints in fire-resistance-rated
assemblies in accordance with Section 714.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

91

06_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:6)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:49:05 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

23. Materials allowed in the concealed spaces of buildings
of Types I and II construction in accordance with Sec-
tion 717.5.
24. Materials exposed within plenums complying with
Section 602 of the International Mechanical Code.
25. Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted in:
25.1. Nonbear ing par t i t ions where the requ ired
fire-resistance rating is 2 hours or less.
25.2. Nonbearing exterior walls where no fire rating
is required.
25.3. Roof construction, including girders, trusses,
framing and decking.
Exception: In buildings of Type IA construc-
tion exceeding two stories above grade plane,
fire-retardant-treated wood is not permitted in
roof construction when the vertical distance
from the upper floor to the roof is less than 20
feet (6096 mm).
603.1.1 Ducts. The use of nonmetallic ducts shall be per-
mitted when installed in accordance with the limitations of
the International Mechanical Code.
603.1.2 Piping. The use of combustible piping materials
shall be permitted when installed in accordance with the
limitations of the International Mechanical Code and the
International Plumbing Code.
603.1.3 Electrical. The use of electrical wiring methods
with combustible insulation, tubing, raceways and related
components shall be permitted when installed in accor-
dance with the limitations of this code.

92

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

06_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:6)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 12:49:06 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 7

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

SECTION 701
GENERAL

701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
materials, systems and assemblies used for structural fire resis-
tance and fire-resistance-rated construction separation of adja-
cent spaces to safeguard against the spread of fire and smoke
within a building and the spread of fire to or from buildings.

SECTION 702
DEFINITIONS

702.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
ANNULAR SPACE. The opening around the penetrating
item.
BUILDING ELEMENT. A fundamental component of build-
ing construction, listed in Table 601, which may or may not be
of fire-resistance-rated construction and is constructed of
materials based on the building type of construction.
CEILING RADIATION DAMPER. A listed device installed
in a ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or
roof/ceiling assembly to limit automatically the radiative heat
transfer through an air inlet/outlet opening.
COMBINATION FIRE /SMOKE DAMPER . A l is ted
device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to
close automatically upon the detection of heat and resist the
passage of flame and smoke. The device is installed to operate
automatically, controlled by a smoke detection system, and
where required, is capable of being positioned from a fire com-
mand center.
DAMPER. See “Ceiling radiation damper,” “Combination
fire/smoke damper,” “Fire damper” and “Smoke damper.”
DRAFTSTOP. A material, device or construction installed to
restrict the movement of air within open spaces of concealed
areas of building components such as crawl spaces, floor/ceil-
ing assemblies, roof/ceiling assemblies and attics.
F RATING. The time period that the through-penetration
firestop system limits the spread of fire through the penetration
when tested in accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479.
FIRE BARRIER. A fire-resistance-rated wall assembly of
materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which conti-
nuity is maintained.
FIRE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air
transfer openings designed to close automatically upon detec-
tion of heat and resist the passage of flame. Fire dampers are
classified for use in either static systems that will automatically
shut down in the event of a fire, or in dynamic systems that con-
tinue to operate during a fire. A dynamic fire damper is tested
and rated for closure under elevated temperature airflow.

FIRE DOOR. The door component of a fire door assembly.
FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. Any combination of a fire door,
frame, hardware and other accessories that together provide a
specific degree of fire protection to the opening.
FIRE PARTITION . A ve r t ica l assemb ly o f ma te r ia ls
designed to restrict the spread of fire in which openings are pro-
tected.
FIRE PROTECTION RATING. The period of time that an
opening protective will maintain the ability to confine a fire as
determined by tests prescribed in Section 715. Ratings are
stated in hours or minutes.
FIRE RESISTANCE. That property of materials or their
assemblies that prevents or retards the passage of excessive
heat, hot gases or flames under conditions of use.
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. The period of time a build-
ing element, component or assembly maintains the ability to
confine a fire, continues to perform a given structural function,
or both, as determined by the tests, or the methods based on
tests, prescribed in Section 703.
FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM. An assemblage of
specific materials or products that are designed, tested and
fire-resistance rated in accordance with either ASTM E 1966 or
UL 2079 to resist for a prescribed period of time the passage of
fire through joints made in or between fire-resistance-rated
assemblies.
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured
from the building face to one of the following:
1. The closest interior lot line;
2. To the centerline of a street, an alley or public way; or
3. To an imaginary line between two buildings on the prop-
erty.
The distance shall be measured at right angles from the face
of the wall.
FIRE WALL. A fire-resistance-rated wall having protected
openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends contin-
uously from the foundation to or through the roof, with suffi-
cient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse
of construction on either side without collapse of the wall.
FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY. A window constructed and
glazed to give protection against the passage of fire.
FIREBLOCKING. Building materials or materials for use as
fireblocking, installed to resist the free passage of flame to
other areas of the building through concealed spaces.
FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. A combination of a fire
door, a frame, hardware and other accessories installed in a hor-
izontal plane, which together provide a specific degree of fire
protection to a through-opening in a fire-resistance-rated floor
(see Section 712.8).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

93

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:54 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY. A fire-resistance-rated floor
or roof assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of
fire in which continuity is maintained.
JOINT. The linear opening in or between adjacent fire-resis-
tance-rated assemblies that is designed to allow independent
movement of the building in any plane caused by thermal, seis-
mic, wind or any other loading.
MEMBRANE PENETRATION. An opening made through
one side (wall, floor or ceiling membrane) of an assembly.
MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP. A material,
device or construction installed to resist for a prescribed time
period the passage of flame and heat through openings in a pro-
tective membrane in order to accommodate cables, cable trays,
conduit, tubing, pipes or similar items.
MINERAL FIBER. Insulation composed principally of fibers
manufactured from rock, slag or glass, with or without binders.
MINERAL WOOL. Synthetic vitreous fiber insulation made
by melting predominately igneous rock or furnace slag, and
other inorganic materials, and then physically forming the melt
into fibers.
PENETRAT ION F IRESTOP. A th r o u g h - p e n e t r a t io n

firestop or a membrane-penetration firestop.
SELF-CLOSING. As applied to a fire door or other opening
protective, means equipped with an device that will ensure
closing after having been opened.
SHAFT. An enclosed space extending through one or more
stories of a building, connecting vertical openings in succes-
sive floors, or floors and roof.
SHAFT ENCLOSURE. The walls or construction forming
the boundaries of a shaft.
SMOKE BARRIER. A continuous membrane, either vertical
or horizontal, such as a wall, floor or ceiling assembly, that is
designed and constructed to restrict the movement of smoke.
SMOKE COMPARTMENT. A space within a building
enclosed by smoke barriers on all sides, including the top and
bottom.
SMOKE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air
transfer openings designed to resist the passage of smoke. The
device is installed to operate automatically, controlled by a
smoke detection system, and where required, is capable of
being positioned from a fire command center.
SPLICE. The result of a factory and/or field method of joining
or connecting two or more lengths of a fire-resistant joint sys-
tem into a continuous entity.
T RATING. The time period that the penetration firestop sys-
tem, including the penetrating item, limits the maximum tem-
perature rise to 325°F (163°C) above its initial temperature
through the penetration on the nonfire side when tested in
accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479.
THROUGH PENETRATION. An opening that passes
through an entire assembly.
THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. An
assemblage of specific materials or products that are designed,
tested and fire-resistance rated to resist for a prescribed period

of time the spread of fire through penetrations. The F and T
rating criteria for penetration firestop systems shall be in accor-
dance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479. See definitions of “F rat-
ing” and “T rating.”

SECTION 703
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS AND FIRE TESTS

703.1 Scope. Materials prescribed herein for fire resistance
shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
703.2 Fire-resistance ratings. The fire-resistance rating of
building elements, components or assemblies shall be deter-
mined in accordance with the test procedures set forth in
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 or in accordance with Section 703.3.
Where materials, systems or devices that have not been tested
as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly are incorporated into
the building element, component or assembly, sufficient data
shall be made available to the building official to show that the
required fire-resistance rating is not reduced. Materials and
methods of construction used to protect joints and penetrations
in fire-resistance-rated building elements, components or
assemblies shall not reduce the required fire-resistance rating.
Exception: In determining the fire-resistance rating of
exterior bearing walls, compliance with the ASTM E 119 or
UL 263 criteria for unexposed surface temperature rise and
ignition of cotton waste due to passage of flame or gases is
required only for a period of time corresponding to the
required fire-resistance rating of an exterior nonbearing
wall with the same fire separation distance, and in a build-
ing of the same group. When the fire-resistance rating
determined in accordance with this exception exceeds the
fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with ASTM
E 119 or UL 263, the fire exposure time period, water pres-
sure and application duration criteria for the hose stream test
of ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall be based upon the
fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with this
exception.
703.2.1 Nonsymmetrical wall construction. Interior walls
and partitions of nonsymmetrical construction shall be
tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the
assigned fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration
obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263. When evidence is furnished to
show that the wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side
exposed to the furnace, subject to acceptance of the building
official, the wall need not be subjected to tests from the
opposite side (see Section 705.5 for exterior walls).
703.2.2 Combustible components. Combustible aggre-
gates are permitted in gypsum and portland cement concrete
mixtures for fire-resistance-rated construction. Any compo-
nent material or admixture is permitted in assemblies if the
resulting tested assembly meets the fire-resistance test
requirements of this code.
703.2.3 Restrained classification. Fire-resistance-rated
assemblies tested under ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not be
considered to be restrained unless evidence satisfactory to
the building official is furnished by the registered design
professional showing that the construction qualifies for a

94

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:55 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

restrained classification in accordance with ASTM E 119 or
UL 263. Restrained construction shall be identified on the
plans.
703.3 Alternative methods for determining fire resistance.
The application of any of the alternative methods listed in this
section shall be based on the fire exposure and acceptance crite-
ria specified in ASTM E 119 or UL 263. The required fire resis-
tance of a building element, component or assembly shall be
permitted to be established by any of the following methods or
procedures:
1. Fire-resistance designs documented in sources.
2. Prescriptive designs of fire-resistance-rated building
elements, components or assemblies as prescribed in
Section 720.
3. Calculations in accordance with Section 721.
4. Engineering analysis based on a comparison of building
element, component or assemblies designs having
fire-resistance ratings as determined by the test proce-
dures set forth in ASTM E 119 or UL 263.
5. Alternative protection methods as allowed by Section
104.11.
703.4 Noncombustibility tests. The tests indicated in Sections
703.4.1 and 703.4.2 shall serve as criteria for acceptance of
building materials as set forth in Sections 602.2, 602.3 and
602.4 in Type I, II, III and IV construction. The term
“noncombustible” does not apply to the flame spread charac-
teristics of interior finish or trim materials. A material shall not
be classified as a noncombustible building construction mate-
rial if it is subject to an increase in combustibility or flame
spread beyond the limitations herein established through the
effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions.
703.4.1 Elementary materials. Materials required to be
noncombustible shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E
136.
703.4.2 Composite materials. Materials having a struc-
tural base of noncombustible material as determined in
accordance with Section 703.4.1 with a surfacing not more
than 0.125 inch (3.18 mm) thick that has a flame spread
index not greater than 50 when tested in accordance with
ASTM E 84 or UL 723 shall be acceptable as
noncombustible materials.
703.5 Fire-resistance-rated glazing. Fire-resistance-rated
glazing, when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL
263 and complying with the requirements of Section 707, shall
be permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall bear a label or
other identification showing the name of the manufacturer, the
test standard and the identifier “W-XXX,” where the “XXX” is
the fire-resistance rating in minutes. Such label or identifica-
tion shall be issued by an agency and shall be permanently
affixed to the glazing.
703.6 Marking and identification. Fire walls, fire barriers,

fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions or any
other wall required to have protected openings or penetrations

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

shall be effectively and permanently identified with signs or
stenciling. Such identification shall:
1. Be located in accessible concealed floor, floor-ceiling or
attic spaces;
2. Be repeated at intervals not exceeding 30 feet (914 mm)
measured horizontally along the wall or partition; and
3. Include lettering not less than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) in
height, incorporating the suggested wording: “FIRE
AND /OR SMOKE BARR IER— PROTECT ALL
OPENINGS,” or other wording.
Exception: Walls in Group R-2 occupancies that do
not have a removable decorative ceiling allowing
access to the concealed space.

SECTION 704
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF
STRUCTURAL MEMBERS

704.1 Requirements. The fire-resistance ratings of structural
members and assemblies shall comply with this section and the
requirements for the type of construction as specified in Table
601. The fire-resistance ratings shall not be less than the rat-
ings required for the fire-resistance-rated assemblies supported
by the structural members.
Exception: Fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers
and horizontal assemblies as provided in Sections 707.5,
709.4, 710.4 and 712.4, respectively.
704.2 Column protection. Where columns are required to be
fire-resistance rated, the entire column shall be provided indi-
vidual encasement protection by protecting it on all sides for
the full column length, including connections to other struc-
tural members, with materials having the required fire-resis-
tance rating. Where the column extends through a ceiling, the
encasement protection shall be continuous from the top of the
foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below through the ceiling
space to the top of the column.
704.3 Protection of the primary structural frame other
than columns. Members of the primary structural frame other
than columns that are required to have a fire-resistance rating
and support more than two floors or one floor and roof, or sup-
port a load-bearing wall or a nonload-bearing wall more than
two stories high, shall be provided individual encasement pro-
tection by protecting them on all sides for their full length,
including connections to other structural members, with mate-
rials having the required fire-resistance rating.
Exception: Individual encasement protection on all sides
shall be permitted on all exposed sides provided the extent
of protection is in accordance with the required fire-resis-
tance rating, as determined in Section 703.
704.4 Protection of secondary members. Secondary mem-
bers that are required to have a fire-resistance rating shall be
protected by individual encasement protection, by the mem-
brane or ceiling of a horizontal assembly in accordance with
Section 712, or by a combination of both.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

95

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:55 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

704.4.1 Light-frame construction. King studs and bound-
ary elements that are integral elements in load-bearing
walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to have
required fire-resistance ratings provided by the membrane
protection provided for the load-bearing wall.
704.5 Truss protection. The required thickness and construc-
tion of fire-resistance-rated assemblies enclosing trusses shall
be based on the results of full-scale tests or combinations of
tests on truss components or on approved calculations based on
such tests that satisfactorily demonstrate that the assembly has
the required fire resistance.

704.6 Attachments to structural members. The edges of
lugs, brackets, rivets and bolt heads attached to structural mem-
bers shall be permitted to extend to within 1 inch (25 mm) of the
surface of the fire protection.
704.7 Reinforcing. Thickness of protection for concrete or
masonry reinforcement shall be measured to the outside of the
reinforcement except that stirrups and spiral reinforcement ties
are permitted to project not more than 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) into
the protection.
704.8 Embedments and enclosures. Pipes, wires, conduits,
ducts or other service facilities shall not be embedded in the
required fire protective covering of a structural member that is
required to be individually encased.
704.9 Impact protection. Where the fire protective covering
of a structural member is subject to impact damage from mov-
ing vehicles, the handling of merchandise or other activity, the
fire protective covering shall be protected by corner guards or
by a substantial jacket of metal or other noncombustible mate-
rial to a height adequate to provide full protection, but not less
than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the finished floor.
Exception: Corner protection is not required on concrete
columns in open or enclosed parking garages.
704.10 Exterior structural members. Load-bearing struc-
tural members located within the exterior walls or on the out-
side of a building or structure shall be provided with the highest
fire-resistance rating as determined in accordance with the fol-
lowing:
1. As required by Table 601 for the type of building ele-
ment based on the type of construction of the building;
2. As required by Table 601 for exterior bearing walls
based on the type of construction; and
3. As required by Table 602 for exterior walls based on the
fire separation distance.

704.11 Bottom flange protection. Fire protection is not
required at the bottom flange of lintels, shelf angles and plates,
spanning not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) whether part of the
primary structural frame or not, and from the bottom flange of
lintels, shelf angles and plates not part of the primary structural
frame, regardless of span.
704.12 Seismic isolation systems. Fire-resistance ratings for
the isolation system shall meet the fire-resistance rating
required for the columns, walls or other structural elements in
which the isolation system is installed in accordance with Table
601. Isolation systems required to have a fire-resistance rating
shall be protected with approved materials or construction

assemblies designed to provide the same degree of fire resis-
tance as the structural element in which it is installed when
tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 (see Section
703.2).
Such isolation system protection applied to isolator units
shall be capable of retarding the transfer of heat to the isolator
unit in such a manner that the required gravity load-carrying
capacity of the isolator unit will not be impaired after exposure
to the standard time-temperature curve fire test prescribed in
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 for a duration not less than that
required for the fire-resistance rating of the structure element
in which it is installed.
Such isolation system protection applied to isolator units
shall be suitably designed and securely installed so as not to
dislodge, loosen, sustain damage or otherwise impair its ability
to accommodate the seismic movements for which the isolator
unit is designed and to maintain its integrity for the purpose of
providing the required fire-resistance protection.
704.13 Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM). Sprayed
fire-resistant materials (SFRM) shall comply with Sections
704.13.1 through 704.13.5.
704.13.1 Fire-resistance rating. The application of SFRM
shall be consistent with the fire-resistance rating and the
listing, including, but not limited to, minimum thickness
and dry density of the applied SFRM, method of applica-
tion, substrate surface conditions and the use of bonding
adhesives, sealants, reinforcing or other materials.
704.13.2 Manufacturer’s installation instructions. The
application of SFRM shall be in accordance with the manu-
facturer’s installation instructions. The instructions shall
include, but are not limited to, substrate temperatures and
surface conditions and SFRM handling, storage, mixing,
conveyance, method of application, curing and ventilation.
704.13.3 Substrate condition. The SFRM shall be applied
to a substrate in compliance with Sections 704.13.3.1
through 704.13.3.2.
704.13.3.1 Surface conditions. Substrates to receive
SFRM shall be free of dirt, oil, grease, release agents,
loose scale and any other condition that prevents adhe-
sion. The substrates shall also be free of primers, paints
and encapsulants other than those fire tested and listed by
a nationally recognized testing agency. Primed, painted
or encapsulated steel shall be allowed, provided that test-
ing has demonstrated that required adhesion is main-
tained.
704.13.3.2 Primers, paints and encapsulants. Where
the SFRM is to be applied over primers, paints or
encapsulants other than those specified in the listing, the
material shall be field tested in accordance with ASTM E
736. Where testing of the SFRM with primers, paints or
encapsulants demonstrates that required adhesion is
maintained, SFRM shall be permitted to be applied to
primed, painted or encapsulated wide flange steel shapes
in accordance with the following conditions:
1. The beam flange width does not exceed 12 inches
(305 mm); or

96

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:56 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. The column flange width does not exceed 16
inches (400 mm); or
3. The beam or column web depth does not exceed 16
inches (400 mm).
4. The average and minimum bond strength values
shall be determined based on a minimum of five
bond tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E
736. Bond tests conducted in accordance with
ASTM E 736 shall indicate a minimum average
bond strength of 80 percent and a minimum indi-
vidual bond strength of 50 percent, when com-
pared to the bond strength of the SFRM as applied
to clean uncoated 1/8-inch-thick (3-mm) steel plate.
704.13.4 Temperature. A minimum ambient and substrate
temperature of 40ºF (4.44ºC) shall be maintained during
and for a minimum of 24 hours after the application of the
SFRM, unless the manufacturer’s installation instructions
allow otherwise.

704.13.5 Finished condition. The finished condition of
SFRM applied to structural members or assemblies shall
not, upon complete drying or curing, exhibit cracks, voids,
spalls, delamination or any exposure of the substrate. Sur-
face irregularities of SFRM shall be deemed acceptable.

SECTION 705
EXTERIOR WALLS

705.1 General. Exterior walls shall comply with this section.

705.2 Projections. Cornices, eave overhangs, exterior balco-
nies and similar projections extending beyond the exterior wall
shall conform to the requirements of this section and Section
1406. Exterior egress balconies and exterior exit stairways
shall also comply with Sections 1019 and 1026, respectively.
Projections shall not extend beyond the distance determined by
the following three methods, whichever results in the lesser
projection:

1. A point one-third the distance from the exterior face of
the wall to the lot line where protected openings or a
combination of protected and unprotected openings are
required in the exterior wall.
2. A point one-half the distance from the exterior face of the
wall to the lot line where all openings in the exterior wall
are permitted to be unprotected or the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
installed under the provisions of Section 705.8.2.
3. More than 12 inches (305 mm) into areas where open-
ings are prohibited.

Buildings on the same lot and considered as portions of one
building in accordance with Section 705.3 are not required to
comply with this section.

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

705.2.2 Type III, IV or V construction. Projections from
walls of Type III, IV or V construction shall be of any
approved material.
705.2.3 Combustible projections. Combustible projec-
tions located where openings are not permitted or where
protection of openings is required shall be of at least 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction, Type IV construction,
fire-retardant-treated wood or as required by Section
1406.3.
Exception: Type V construction shall be allowed for R-3
occupancies.
705.3 Buildings on the same lot. For the purposes of deter-
mining the required wall and opening protection and roof-cov-
ering requirements, buildings on the same lot shall be assumed
to have an imaginary line between them.
Where a new building is to be erected on the same lot as an
existing building, the location of the assumed imaginary line
with relation to the existing building shall be such that the exte-
rior wall and opening protection of the existing building meet
the criteria as set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8.
Exception: Two or more buildings on the same lot shall
either be regulated as separate buildings or shall be consid-
ered as portions of one building if the aggregate area of such
buildings is within the limits specified in Chapter 5 for a sin-
gle building. Where the buildings contain different occu-
pancy groups or are of different types of construction, the
area shall be that allowed for the most restrictive occupancy
or construction.
705.4 Materials. Exterior walls shall be of materials permitted
by the building type of construction.
705 .5 F ire-res istance rat ings . Ex ter ior wa l ls sha l l be
fire-resistance rated in accordance with Tables 601 and 602 and
this section. The required fire-resistance rating of exterior
walls with a fire separation distance of greater than 10 feet
(3048 mm) shall be rated for exposure to fire from the inside.
The required fire-resistance rating of exterior walls with a fire
separation distance of less than or equal to 10 feet (3048 mm)
shall be rated for exposure to fire from both sides.
705.6 Structural stability. The wall shall extend to the height
required by Section 705.11 and shall have sufficient structural
stability such that it will remain in place for the duration of time
indicated by the required fire-resistance rating.
705.7 Unexposed surface temperature. Where protected
openings are not limited by Section 705.8, the limitation on the
rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior walls
as required by ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not apply. Where
protected openings are limited by Section 705.8, the limitation
on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior
walls as required by ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not apply
provided that a correction is made for radiation from the unex-
posed exterior wall surface in accordance with the following
formula:

705.2.1 Type I and II construction. Projections from walls
of Type I or II construction shall be of noncombustible
materials or combustible materials as allowed by Sections
1406.3 and 1406.4.

Ae = A + (Af ´ Feo)
where:
Ae = Equivalent area of protected openings.

(Equation 7-1)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

97

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:56 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

A
Af

= Actual area of protected openings.
= Area of exterior wall surface in the story under consid-
eration exclusive of openings, on which the tempera-
ture limitations of ASTM E 119 or UL 263 for walls are
exceeded.
Feo = An “equivalent opening factor” derived from Figure
705.7 based on the average temperature of the unex-
posed wall surface and the fire-resistance rating of the
wall.

705.8 Openings. Openings in exterior walls shall comply with
Sections 705.8.1 through 705.8.6.

705.8.1 Allowable area of openings. The maximum area of
unprotected and protected openings permitted in an exterior
wall in any story of a building shall not exceed the percent-
ages specified in Table 705.8.

Exceptions:

1. In other than Group H occupancies, unlimited
unprotected openings are permitted in the first
story above grade either:

1.1. Where the wall faces a street and has a fire
separation distance of more than 15 feet
(4572 mm); or

1.2. Where the wall faces an unoccupied space.
The unoccupied space shall be on the same
lot or dedicated for public use, shall not be
less than 30 feet (9144 mm) in width and
shall have access from a street by a posted
fire lane in accordance with the Interna-
tional Fire Code.
2. Buildings whose exterior bearing walls, exterior
nonbearing walls and exterior primary structural
frame are not required to be fire-resistance rated
shall be permitted to have unlimited unprotected
openings.
705.8.2 Protected openings. Where openings are required
to be protected, fire doors and fire shutters shall comply
with Section 715.4 and fire window assemblies shall comply
with Section 715.5.
Exception: Opening protectives are not required where
the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1
and the exterior openings are protected by a water curtain
using automatic sprinklers approved for that use.
705.8.3 Unprotected openings. Where unprotected open-
ings are permitted, windows and doors shall be constructed
of any approved materials. Glazing shall conform to the
requirements of Chapters 24 and 26.

For SI:

°C = [(°F) - 32] / 1.8.

FIGURE 705.7
EQUIVALENT OPENING FACTOR

98

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:58 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 705.8
MAXIMUM AREA OF EXTERIOR WALL OPENINGS BASED ON FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE AND DEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTION

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
(feet)

DEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTION

ALLOWABLE AREAa

0 to less than 3b, c

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

3 to less than 5d, e

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

5 to less than 10e, f

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

10 to less than 15e, f, g

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

15 to less than 20f, g

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

20 to less than 25f, g

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

25 to less than 30f, g

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)

30 or greater

Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i

Protected (P)

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

15%

15%

10%h

25%

25%

15%h

45%

45%

25%

75%

75%

45%

No Limit

No Limit

70%

No Limit

No Limit

No Limit

Not Required

Not Required

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
UP, NS = Unprotected openings in buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
UP, S
= Unprotected openings in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
P
= Openings protected with an opening protective assembly in accordance with Section 705.8.2.
a. Values indicated are the percentage of the area of the exterior wall, per story.
b. For the requirements for fire walls of buildings with differing heights, see Section 706.6.1.
c. For openings in a fire wall for buildings on the same lot, see Section 706.8.
d. The maximum percentage of unprotected and protected openings shall be 25 percent for Group R-3 occupancies.
e. Unprotected openings shall not be permitted for openings with a fire separation distance of less than 15 feet for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies.
f. The area of unprotected and protected openings shall not be limited for Group R-3 occupancies, with a fire separation distance of 5 feet or greater.
g. The area of openings in an open parking structure with a fire separation distance of 10 feet or greater shall not be limited.
h. Includes buildings accessory to Group R-3.
i. Not applicable to Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

99

07_ibc_2009pg99.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 9:25:35 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

705.8.4 Mixed openings. Where both unprotected and pro-
tected openings are located in the exterior wall in any story
of a building, the total area of openings shall be determined
in accordance with the following:

(Equation 7-2)

(Ap/ ap) + (Au/au) £ 1
where:
Ap = Actual area of protected openings, or the equivalent
area of protected openings, Ae (see Section 705.7).
ap = Allowable area of protected openings.
Au = Actual area of unprotected openings.
au = Allowable area of unprotected openings.
705.8.5 Vertical separation of openings. Openings in exte-
rior walls in adjacent stories shall be separated vertically to
protect against fire spread on the exterior of the buildings
where the openings are within 5 feet (1524 mm) of each
other horizontally and the opening in the lower story is not a
protected opening with a fire protection rating of not less
than 3/4 hour. Such openings shall be separated vertically at
least 3 feet (914 mm) by spandrel girders, exterior walls or
other similar assemblies that have a fire-resistance rating of
at least 1 hour or by flame barriers that extend horizontally
at least 30 inches (762 mm) beyond the exterior wall. Flame
barriers shall also have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1
hour. The unexposed surface temperature limitations speci-
fied in ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not apply to the flame
barriers or vertical separation unless otherwise required by
the provisions of this code.
Exceptions:
1. This section shall not apply to buildings that are
three stories or less above grade plane.
2. This section shall not apply to buildings equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
3. Open parking garages.
705.8.6 Vertical exposure. For buildings on the same lot,
opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not
less than 3/4 hour shall be provided in every opening that is
less than 15 feet (4572 mm) vertically above the roof of an
adjacent building or structure based on assuming an imagi-
nary line between them. The opening protectives are
required where the fire separation distance between the
imaginary line and the adjacent building or structure is less
than 15 feet (4572 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Opening protectives are not required where the
roof assembly of the adjacent building or structure
has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour
for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) from
the exterior wall facing the imaginary line and the
entire length and span of the supporting elements
for the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly has a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.
2. Buildings on the same lot and considered as por-
tions of one building in accordance with Section

705.3 are not required to comply with Section
705.8.6.
705.9 Joints. Joints made in or between exterior walls required
by this section to have a fire-resistance rating shall comply
with Section 714.
Exception: Joints in exterior walls that are permitted to
have unprotected openings.
705.9.1 Voids. The void created at the intersection of a
floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assem-
bly shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.
705.10 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations by air
ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistance-rated exterior
walls required to have protected openings shall comply with
Section 716.
Exception: Foundation vents installed in accordance with
this code are permitted.
705.11 Parapets. Parapets shall be provided on exterior walls
of buildings.
Exceptions: A parapet need not be provided on an exterior
wall where any of the following conditions exist:
1. The wall is not required to be fire-resistance rated in
accordance with Table 602 because of fire separation
distance.
2. The building has an area of not more than 1,000
square feet (93 m2) on any floor.
3. Walls that terminate at roofs of not less than 2-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction or where the roof,
including the deck or slab and supporting construc-
tion, is constructed entirely of noncombustible mate-
rials.
4. One-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior walls that ter-
minate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or
slab, provided:
4.1. Where the roof/ceiling framing elements are
parallel to the walls, such framing and ele-
ments supporting such framing shall not be of
less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated con-
struction for a width of 4 feet (1220 mm) for
Groups R and U and 10 feet (3048 mm) for
other occupancies, measured from the interior
side of the wall.
4.2. Where roof/ceiling framing elements are not
parallel to the wall, the entire span of such
framing and elements supporting such fram-
ing shall not be of less than 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated construction.
4.3. Openings in the roof shall not be located
within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the 1-hour fire-re-
sistance-rated exterior wall for Groups R and
U and 10 feet (3048 mm) for other occupan-
cies, measured from the interior side of the
wall.
4.4. The entire building shall be provided with not
less than a Class B roof covering.

100

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:30:59 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

5. In Groups R-2 and R-3 where the entire building is
provided with a Class C roof covering, the exterior
wall shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of
the roof sheathing or deck in Type III, IV and V con-
struction, provided:
5.1. The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of
approved noncombustible materials or of
fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4
feet (1220 mm); or
5.2. The roof is protected with 0.625-inch (16
mm) Type X gypsum board directly beneath
the underside of the roof sheathing or deck,
supported by a minimum of nominal 2-inch
(51 mm) ledgers attached to the sides of the
roof framing members for a minimum dis-
tance of 4 feet (1220 mm).
6. Where the wall is permitted to have at least 25 percent
of the exterior wall areas containing unprotected
openings based on fire separation distance as deter-
mined in accordance with Section 705.8.
705.11.1 Parapet construction. Parapets shall have the
same fire-resistance rating as that required for the support-
ing wall, and on any side adjacent to a roof surface, shall
have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 18 inches
(457 mm), including counterflashing and coping materials.
The height of the parapet shall not be less than 30 inches
(762 mm) above the point where the roof surface and the
wall intersect. Where the roof slopes toward a parapet at a
slope greater than two units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(16.7-percent slope), the parapet shall extend to the same
height as any portion of the roof within a fire separation dis-
tance where protection of wall openings is required, but in
no case shall the height be less than 30 inches (762 mm).

SECTION 706
FIRE WALLS

706.1 General. Each portion of a building separated by one or
more fire walls that comply with the provisions of this section
shall be considered a separate building. The extent and location
of such fire walls shall provide a complete separation. Where a
fire wall also separates occupancies that are required to be sep-
arated by a fire barrier wall, the most restrictive requirements
of each separation shall apply.

706.1.1 Party walls. Any wall located on a lot line between
adjacent buildings, which is used or adapted for joint service
between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall
in accordance with Section 706. Party walls shall be con-
structed without openings and shall create separate build-
ings.

Exception: Openings in a party wall separating an
anchor building and a mall shall be in accordance with
Section 402.7.3.1.

706.2 Structural stability. Fire walls shall have sufficient
structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of
construction on either side without collapse of the wall for the

➡

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

duration of time indicated by the required fire-resistance rat-
ing.
706 .3 Ma ter ia ls . Fire wa l ls sha l l be o f any approved
noncombustible materials.
Exception: Buildings of Type V construction.
706.4 Fire-resistance rating. Fire walls shall have a fire-resis-
tance rating of not less than that required by Table 706.4.

TABLE 706.4
FIRE WALL FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS

GROUP

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

A, B, E, H-4, I, R-1, R-2, U

F-1, H-3b, H-5, M, S-1

H-1, H-2

F-2, S-2, R-3, R-4

3a

3

4b

2

a. In Type II or V construction, walls shall be permitted to have a 2-hour
fire-resistance rating.
b. For Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 buildings, also see Sections 415.4 and 415.5.

706.5 Horizontal continuity. Fire walls shall be continuous
from exterior wall to exterior wall and shall extend at least 18
inches (457 mm) beyond the exterior surface of exterior walls.
Exceptions:
1. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the inte-
rior surface of combustible exterior sheathing or sid-
ing provided the exterior wall has a fire-resistance
rating of at least 1 hour for a horizontal distance of at
least 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall.
Openings within such exterior walls shall be pro-
tected by opening protectives having a fire protection
rating of not less than 3/4 hour.
2. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the inte-
rior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing,
exterior siding or other noncombustible exterior fin-
ishes provided the sheathing, siding, or other exterior
noncombustible finish extends a horizontal distance
of at least 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the fire
wall.
3. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the inte-
rior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing
where the building on each side of the fire wall is pro-
tected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
706.5.1 Exterior walls. Where the fire wall intersects exte-
rior walls, the fire-resistance rating and opening protection
of the exterior walls shall comply with one of the following:
1. The exterior walls on both sides of the fire wall shall
have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating with 3/4-hour pro-
tection where opening protection is required by Sec-
tion 705.8. The fire-resistance rating of the exterior
wall shall extend a minimum of 4 feet (1220 mm) on
each side of the intersection of the fire wall to exterior
wall. Exterior wall intersections at fire walls that form
an angle equal to or greater than 180 degrees (3.14
rad) do not need exterior wall protection.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

101

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:00 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2. Buildings or spaces on both sides of the intersecting
fire wall shall assume to have an imaginary lot line at
the fire wall and extending beyond the exterior of the
fire wall. The location of the assumed line in relation
to the exterior walls and the fire wall shall be such that
the exterior wall and opening protection meet the
requirements set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8.
Such protection is not required for exterior walls ter-
minating at fire walls that form an angle equal to or
greater than 180 degrees (3.14 rad).
706.5.2 Horizontal projecting elements. Fire walls shall
extend to the outer edge of horizontal projecting elements
such as balconies, roof overhangs, canopies, marquees and
similar projections that are within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the
fire wall.

Exceptions:
1. Horizontal projecting elements without concealed
spaces, provided the exterior wall behind and
below the projecting element has not less than
1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a dis-
tance not less than the depth of the projecting ele-
ment on both sides of the fire wall. Openings
within such exterior walls shall be protected by
opening protectives having a fire protection rating
of not less than 3/4 hour.
2. Noncombustible horizontal projecting elements
with concealed spaces, provided a minimum
1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall extends through
the concealed space. The projecting element shall
be separated from the building by a minimum of
1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a dis-
tance on each side of the fire wall equal to the depth
of the projecting element. The wall is not required
to extend under the projecting element where the
building exterior wall is not less than 1-hour
fire-resistance rated for a distance on each side of
the fire wall equal to the depth of the projecting
element. Openings within such exterior walls shall
be protected by opening protectives having a fire
protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.
3. For combustible horizontal projecting elements
with concealed spaces, the fire wall need only
extend through the concealed space to the outer
edges of the projecting elements. The exterior wall
behind and below the projecting element shall be
of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated con-
struction for a distance not less than the depth of
the projecting elements on both sides of the fire
wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be
p r o t e c t e d b y o p e n in g p r o t e c t iv e s h a v in g a
fire-protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.
706.6 Vertical continuity. Fire walls shall extend from the
foundation to a termination point at least 30 inches (762 mm)
above both adjacent roofs.
Exceptions:
1. S tepped bu i ld ing s in acco rdance w i th Sec t ion
706.6.1.

102

2. Two-hour fire-resistance-rated walls shall be permit-
ted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing,
deck or slab, provided:
2.1. The lower roof assembly within 4 feet (1220
mm) of the wall has not less than a 1-hour
fire-resistance rating and the entire length
and span of supporting elements for the rated
roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of
not less than 1 hour.
2.2. Openings in the roof shall not be located
within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall.
2.3. Each building shall be provided with not less
than a Class B roof covering.
3. Walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside
of noncombustible roof sheathing, deck or slabs
where both buildings are provided with not less than a
Class B roof covering. Openings in the roof shall not
be located within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall.
4. In buildings of Type III, IV and V construction, walls
shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of
combustible roof sheathing or decks, provided:
4.1. There are no openings in the roof within 4 feet
(1220 mm) of the fire wall,
4.2. The roof is covered with a minimum Class B
roof covering, and
4.3. The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of
fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4
feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the wall or the
roof is protected with 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type
X gypsum board directly beneath the under-
side of the roof sheathing or deck, supported
by a minimum of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal
ledgers attached to the sides of the roof fram-
ing members for a minimum distance of 4 feet
(1220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall.
5. In buildings designed in accordance with Section
509.2, fire walls located above the 3-hour horizontal
assembly required by Section 509.2, Item 1 shall be
permitted to extend from the top of this horizontal
assembly.

706.6.1 Stepped buildings. Where a fire wall serves as an
exterior wall for a building and separates buildings having
different roof levels, such wall shall terminate at a point not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof level,
provided the exterior wall for a height of 15 feet (4572 mm)
above the lower roof is not less than 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated construction from both sides with openings pro-
tected by fire assemblies having a fire protection rating of
not less than 3/4 hour.
Exception: Where the fire wall terminates at the under-
side of the roof sheathing, deck or slab of the lower roof,
provided:

1. The lower roof assembly within 10 feet (3048 mm)
of the wall has not less than a 1-hour fire-resis-
tance rating and the entire length and span of sup-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:00 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

porting elements for the rated roof assembly has a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.
2. Openings in the lower roof shall not be located
within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the fire wall.
706.7 Combustible framing in fire walls. Adjacent combusti-
ble members entering into a concrete or masonry fire wall from
opposite sides shall not have less than a 4-inch (102 mm) dis-
tance between embedded ends. Where combustible members
frame into hollow walls or walls of hollow units, hollow spaces
shall be solidly filled for the full thickness of the wall and for a
distance not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above, below and
between the structural members, with noncombustible materi-
als approved for fireblocking.
706.8 Openings. Each opening through a fire wall shall be pro-
tected in accordance with Section 715.4 and shall not exceed
156 square feet (15 m2). The aggregate width of openings at
any floor level shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the
wall.
Exceptions:
1. Openings are not permitted in party walls constructed
in accordance with Section 706.1.1.
2. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15
m2) where both buildings are equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1.
706.9 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire walls shall comply
with Section 713.
706.10 Joints. Joints made in or between fire walls shall com-
ply with Section 714.
706.11 Ducts and air transfer openings. Ducts and air trans-
fer openings shall not penetrate fire walls.
Exception: Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings
of fire walls that are not on a lot line shall be allowed pro-
vided the penetrations comply with Section 716. The size
and aggregate width of all openings shall not exceed the lim-
itations of Section 706.8.

SECTION 707
FIRE BARRIERS

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

707.3.3 Exit passageway. The fire-resistance rating of the
fire barrier separating building areas from an exit passage-
way shall comply with Section 1023.3.
707.3.4 Horizontal exit. The fire-resistance rating of the
separation between building areas connected by a horizon-
tal exit shall comply with Section 1025.1.
707.3.5 Atriums. The fire-resistance rating of the fire bar-
rier separating atriums shall comply with Section 404.6.
707.3.6 Incidental accessory occupancies. The fire bar-
rier separating incidental accessory occupancies from other
spaces in the building shall have a fire-resistance rating of
not less than that indicated in Table 508.2.5.
707.3.7 Control areas. Fire barriers separating control
areas shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that
required in Section 414.2.4.
707.3.8 Separated occupancies. Where the provisions of
Section 508.4 are applicable, the fire barrier separating
mixed occupancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not
less than that indicated in Table 508.4 based on the occupan-
cies being separated.
707.3.9 Fire areas. The fire barriers or horizontal assem-
blies, or both, separating a single occupancy into different
fire areas shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than
that indicated in Table 707.3.9. The fire barriers or horizon-
tal assemblies, or both, separating fire areas of mixed occu-
pancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than the
highest value indicated in Table 707.3.9 for the occupancies
under consideration.

TABLE 707.3.9
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE
BARRIER ASSEMBLIES OR HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES
BETWEEN FIRE AREAS

OCCUPANCY GROUP

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

H-1, H-2

F-1, H-3, S-1

A, B, E, F-2, H-4, H-5,
I, M, R, S-2

U

4

3

2

1

707.1 General. Fire barriers installed as required elsewhere in
this code or the International Fire Code shall comply with this
section.
707.2 Materials. Fire barriers shall be of materials permitted
by the building type of construction.
707.3 Fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating of fire
barriers shall comply with this section.
707.3.1 Shaft enclosures. The fire-resistance rating of the
fire barrier separating building areas from a shaft shall com-
ply with Section 708.4.
707.3.2 Exit enclosures. The fire-resistance rating of the
fire barrier separating building areas from an exit shall com-
ply with Section 1022.1.

707.4 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a
required fire-resistance-rated shaft or exit enclosure, or separa-
tion, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section
705 for exterior walls and the fire-resistance-rated enclosure or
separation requirements shall not apply.
Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance
rated in accordance with Section 1019 for exterior egress
balconies, Section 1022.6 for exit enclosures and Section
1026.6 for exterior exit ramps and stairways.
707.5 Continuity. Fire barriers shall extend from the top of the
floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or
roof sheathing, slab or deck above and shall be securely
attached thereto. Such fire barriers shall be continuous through
concealed spaces, such as the space above a suspended ceiling.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

103

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:01 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

707.5.1 Supporting construction. The supporting con-
struction for a fire barrier shall be protected to afford the
required fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier supported.
Hollow vertical spaces within a fire barrier shall be
fireblocked in accordance with Section 717.2 at every floor
level.
Exceptions:
1. The maximum required fire-resistance rating for
assemblies supporting fire barriers separating
tank storage as provided for in Section 415.6.2.1
shall be 2 hours, but not less than required by Table
601 for the building construction type.
2. Shaft enclosures shall be permitted to terminate at
a top enclosure complying with Section 708.12.
3. Supporting construction for 1-hour fire barriers
required by Table 508.2.5 in buildings of Type
IIB, IIIB and VB construction is not required to be
fire-resistance rated unless required by other sec-
tions of this code.
707.6 Openings. Openings in a fire barrier shall be protected
in accordance with Section 715. Openings shall be limited to a
maximum aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the
wall, and the maximum area of any single opening shall not
exceed 156 square feet (15 m2). Openings in exit enclosures
and exit passageways shall also comply with Sections 1022.3
and 1023.5, respectively.
Exceptions:
1. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15
m 2 ) whe re ad jo in ing f loo r a rea s a re equ ipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15
m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length
of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door
serving an exit enclosure.
3. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15
m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length
of the wall where the opening protective has been
tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and
has a minimum fire-resistance rating not less than the
fire-resistance rating of the wall.
4. Fire window assemblies permitted in atrium separa-
tion walls shall not be limited to a maximum aggre-
gate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall.
5. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15
m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length
of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door
assembly in a fire barrier separating an exit enclosure
from an exit passageway in accordance with Section
1022.2.1.
707.7 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire barriers shall comply
with Section 713.
707.7.1 Prohibited penetrations. Penetrations into an exit
enclosure or an exit passageway shall be allowed only when
permitted by Section 1022.4 or 1023.6, respectively.

104

707.8 Joints. Joints made in or between fire barriers, and joints
made at the intersection of fire barriers with underside of the
floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above, shall comply with
Section 714.

707.9 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a fire
barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with
Section 716.

SECTION 708
SHAFT ENCLOSURES

708.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
shafts required to protect openings and penetrations through
floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies. Shaft enclosures
shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section
707 or horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 712,
or both.

708 .2 Sha f t enc lo sure requ ired . Open ing s th rough a
floor/ceiling assembly shall be protected by a shaft enclosure
complying with this section.

Exceptions:

1. A shaft enclosure is not required for openings totally
within an individual residential dwelling unit and
connecting four stories or less.
2. A shaft enclosure is not required in a building
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 for an esca-
lator opening or stairway that is not a portion of the
means of egress protected according to Item 2.1 or
2.2.
2.1. Where the area of the floor opening between
stories does not exceed twice the horizontal
projected area of the escalator or stairway and
the opening is protected by a draft curtain and
closely spaced sprinklers in accordance with
NFPA 13. In other than Groups B and M, this
application is limited to openings that do not
connect more than four stories.
2.2. Where the opening is protected by approved
power-operated automatic shutters at every
penetrated floor. The shutters shall be of
noncombustib le construction and have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5
hours. The shutter shall be so constructed as to
close immediately upon the actuation of a
smoke detector installed in accordance with
Section 907.3 and shall completely shut off
the well opening. Escalators shall cease oper-
ation when the shutter begins to close. The
shutter shall operate at a speed of not more
than 30 feet per minute (152.4 mm/s) and shall
be equipped with a sensitive leading edge to
arrest its progress where in contact with any
obstacle, and to continue its progress on re-
lease therefrom.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:01 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3. A shaft enclosure is not required for penetrations by
pipe, tube, conduit, wire, cable and vents protected
in accordance with Section 713.4.
4. A shaft enclosure is not required for penetrations by
ducts protected in accordance with Section 716.6.
Grease ducts shall be protected in accordance with
the International Mechanical Code.
5. In other than Group H occupancies, a shaft enclo-
sure is not required for floor openings complying
with the provisions for atriums in Section 404.
6. A shaft enclosure is not required for approved
m a s o n r y c h im n e y s w h e r e a n n u l a r s p a c e i s
fireblocked at each floor level in accordance with
Section 717.2.5.
7. In other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a shaft enclosure is
not required for a floor opening or an air transfer
opening that complies with the following:
7.1. Does not connect more than two stories.
7.2. Is not part of the required means of egress sys-
tem.
7.3. Is not concealed within the construction of a
wall or a floor/ceiling assembly.
7.4. Is not open to a corridor in Group I and R oc-
cupancies.
7.5. Is not open to a corridor on nonsprinklered
floors in any occupancy.
7.6. Is separated from floor openings and air trans-
fer openings serving other floors by construc-
tion conforming to required shaft enclosures.
7.7. Is limited to the same smoke compartment.
8. A shaft enclosure is not required for automobile
ramps in open and enclosed parking garages con-
structed in accordance with Sections 406.3 and
406.4, respectively.
9. A shaft enclosure is not required for floor openings
between a mezzanine and the floor below.
10. A shaft enclosure is not required for joints protected
by a fire-resistant joint system in accordance with
Section 714.
11. A shaft enclosure shall not be required for floor
openings created by unenclosed stairs or ramps in
accordance with Exception 3 or 4 in Section 1016.1.
12. Floor openings protected by floor fire doors in
accordance with Section 712.8.
13. In Group I-3 occupancies, a shaft enclosure is not
required for floor openings in accordance with Sec-
tion 408.5.
14. A shaft enclosure is not required for elevator
hoistways in open or enclosed parking garages that
serve only the parking garage.
15. In open or enclosed parking garages a shaft enclo-
sure is not required to enclose mechanical exhaust or

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

supply duct systems when such duct system is con-
tained within and serves only the parking garage.
16. Where permitted by other sections of this code.
708.3 Materials. The shaft enclosure shall be of materials per-
mitted by the building type of construction.
708.4 Fire-resistance rating. Shaft enclosures shall have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours where connecting
four stories or more, and not less than 1 hour where connecting
less than four stories. The number of stories connected by the
shaft enclosure shall include any basements but not any mezza-
nines. Shaft enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating not
less than the floor assembly penetrated, but need not exceed 2
hours. Shaft enclosures shall meet the requirements of Section
703.2.1.
708.5 Continuity. Shaft enclosures shall be constructed as fire
barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assem-
blies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both, and
shall have continuity in accordance with Section 707.5 for fire
barriers or Section 712.4 for horizontal assemblies as applica-
ble.
708.6 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a
required shaft enclosure, such walls shall comply with the
requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls and the
fire-resistance-rated enclosure requirements shall not apply.
Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance
rated in accordance with Section 1019.2 for exterior egress
balconies, Section 1022.6 for exit enclosures and Section
1026.6 for exterior exit ramps and stairways.
708.7 Openings. Openings in a shaft enclosure shall be pro-
tected in accordance with Section 715 as required for fire barri-
ers. Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing by smoke
detection in accordance with Section 715.4.8.3.
708.7.1 Prohibited openings. Openings other than those
necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be permitted
in shaft enclosures.
708.8 Penetrations. Penetrations in a shaft enclosure shall be
protected in accordance with Section 713 as required for fire
barriers.

708.8.1 Prohibited penetrations. Penetrations other than
those necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be per-
mitted in shaft enclosures.
708.9 Joints. Joints in a shaft enclosure shall comply with Sec-
tion 714.
708.10 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations of a
shaft enclosure by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply
with Section 716.
708.11 Enclosure at the bottom. Shafts that do not extend to
the bottom of the building or structure shall comply with one of
the following:
1. They shall be enclosed at the lowest level with construc-
tion of the same fire-resistance rating as the lowest floor
through which the shaft passes, but not less than the rat-
ing required for the shaft enclosure.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

105

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:02 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2. They shall terminate in a room having a use related to the
purpose of the shaft. The room shall be separated from
the remainder of the building by fire barriers constructed
in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both. The
fire-resistance rating and opening protectives shall be at
least equal to the protection required for the shaft enclo-
sure.
3. They shall be protected by approved fire dampers
installed in accordance with their listing at the lowest
floor level within the shaft enclosure.

Exceptions:

1. The fire-resistance-rated room separation is not
required, provided there are no openings in or pen-
etrations of the shaft enclosure to the interior of the
building except at the bottom. The bottom of the
shaft shall be closed off around the penetrating
items with materials permitted by Section 717.3.1
for draftstopping, or the room shall be provided
with an approved automatic fire suppression sys-
tem.
2. A shaft enclosure containing a refuse chute or
laundry chute shall not be used for any other pur-
pose and shall terminate in a room protected in
accordance with Section 708.13.4.
3. The fire-resistance-rated room separation and the
protection at the bottom of the shaft are not
required provided there are no combustibles in the
shaft and there are no openings or other penetra-
tions through the shaft enclosure to the interior of
the building.

708.12 Enclosure at the top. A shaft enclosure that does not
extend to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab of the
building shall be enclosed at the top with construction of the
same fire-resistance rating as the topmost floor penetrated by
the shaft, but not less than the fire-resistance rating required for
the shaft enclosure.

708.13 Refuse and laundry chutes. Refuse and laundry
chutes, access and termination rooms and incinerator rooms
shall meet the requirements of Sections 708.13.1 through
708.13.6.

Exception: Chutes serving and contained within a single
dwelling unit.

708.13.1 Refuse and laundry chute enclosures. A shaft
enclosure containing a refuse or laundry chute shall not be
used for any other purpose and shall be enclosed in accor-
dance with Section 708.4. Openings into the shaft, includ-
ing those from access rooms and termination rooms, shall
be protected in accordance with this section and Section
715. Openings into chutes shall not be located in corridors.
Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing upon the actuation
of a smoke detector in accordance with Section 715.4.8.3,
except that heat-activated closing devices shall be permitted
between the shaft and the termination room.

708.13.2 Materials. A shaft enclosure containing a refuse
or laundry chute shall be constructed of materials as permit-
ted by the building type of construction.
708.13.3 Refuse and laundry chute access rooms. Access
openings for refuse and laundry chutes shall be located in
rooms or compartments enclosed by not less than 1-hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 712, or both. Openings into the access rooms shall be
protected by opening protectives having a fire protection
rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Doors shall be self- or auto-
matic-closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance
with Section 715.4.8.3.
708.13.4 Termination room. Refuse and laundry chutes
shall discharge into an enclosed room separated from the
remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barri-
ers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizon-
tal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712,
or both. Openings into the termination room shall be pro-
tected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating
of not less than 3/4 hour. Doors shall be self- or auto-
matic-closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance
with Section 715.4.8.3. Refuse chutes shall not terminate in
an incinerator room. Refuse and laundry rooms that are not
provided with chutes need only comply with Table 508.2.5.
708.13.5 Incinerator room. Incinerator rooms shall com-
ply with Table 508.2.5.
708.13.6 Automatic sprinkler system. An approved auto-
matic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with
Section 903.2.11.2.
708.14 Elevator, dumbwaiter and other hoistways. Elevator,
dumbwaiter and other hoistway enclosures shall be con-
structed in accordance with Section 708 and Chapter 30.
708.14.1 Elevator lobby. An enclosed elevator lobby shall
be provided at each floor where an elevator shaft enclosure
connects more than three stories. The lobby enclosure shall
separate the elevator shaft enclosure doors from each floor
by fire partitions. In addition to the requirements in Section
709 for fire partitions, doors protecting openings in the ele-
vator lobby enclosure walls shall also comply with Section
715.4.3 as required for corridor walls and penetrations of
the elevator lobby enclosure by ducts and air transfer open-
ings shall be protected as required for corridors in accor-
dance with Section 716.5.4.1. Elevator lobbies shall have at
least one means of egress complying with Chapter 10 and
other provisions within this code.
Exceptions:
1. Enclosed elevator lobbies are not required at the
street floor, provided the entire street floor is
equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Elevators not required to be located in a shaft in
accordance with Section 708.2 are not required to
have enclosed elevator lobbies.
3. Enclosed elevator lobbies are not required where
additional doors are provided at the hoistway

106

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:02 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

opening in accordance with Section 3002.6. Such
doors shall be tested in accordance with UL 1784
without an artificial bottom seal.
4. Enclosed elevator lobbies are not required where
the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler
sys tem ins ta l led in accordance w i th Sec t ion
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. This exception shall not
apply to the following:
4.1. Group I-2 occupancies;
4.2. Group I-3 occupancies; and
4.3. High-rise buildings.
5. Smoke partitions shall be permitted in lieu of fire
partitions to separate the elevator lobby at each
floor where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. In
addition to the requirements in Section 711 for
smoke partitions, doors protecting openings in the
smoke partitions shall also comply with Sections
711.5.2, 711.5.3, and 715.4.8 and duct penetra-
tions of the smoke partitions shall be protected as
required for corridors in accordance with Section
716.5.4.1.
6. Enclosed elevator lobbies are not required where
the elevator hoistway is pressurized in accordance
with Section 708.14.2.
7. Enclosed elevator lobbies are not required where
the elevator serves only open parking garages in
accordance with Section 406.3.
708.14.1.1 Areas of refuge. Areas of refuge shall be pro-
vided as required in Section 1007.
708.14.2 Enclosed elevator lobby. Where elevator hoist-
way pressurization is provided in lieu of required enclosed
elevator lobbies, the pressurization system shall comply
with this section.
708.14.2.1 Pressurization requirements. Elevator
hoistways shall be pressurized to maintain a minimum
positive pressure of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a
maximum positive pressure of 0.25 inches of water (67
Pa) with respect to adjacent occupied space on all floors.
This pressure shall be measured at the midpoint of each
hoistway door, with all elevator cars at the floor of recall
and all hoistway doors on the floor of recall open and all
other hoistway doors closed. The opening and closing of
hoistway doors at each level must be demonstrated dur-
ing this test. The supply air intake shall be from an out-
s ide , uncon tam ina ted sou rce loca ted a m in imum
distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) from any air exhaust sys-
tem or outlet.
708.14.2.2 Rational analysis. A rational analysis com-
plying with Section 909.4 shall be submitted with the
construction documents.

708.14.2.3 Ducts for system. Any duct system that is
part of the pressurization system shall be protected with
the same fire-resistance rating as required for the eleva-
tor shaft enclosure.

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

708.14.2.4 Fan system. The fan system provided for the
pressurization system shall be as required by this section.
708.14.2.4.1 Fire resistance. When located within
the building, the fan system that provides the pressur-
ization shall be protected with the same fire-resis-
tance rating required for the elevator shaft enclosure.
708.14.2.4.2 Smoke detection. The fan system shall
be equipped with a smoke detector that will automati-
cally shut down the fan system when smoke is
detected within the system.
708.14.2.4.3 Separate systems. A separate fan sys-
tem shall be used for each elevator hoistway.
708.14.2.4.4 Fan capacity. The supply fan shall
either be adjustable with a capacity of at least 1,000
cfm (.4719 m3/s) per door, or that specified by a regis-
tered design professional to meet the requirements of
a designed pressurization system.
708.14.2.5 Standby power. The pressurization system
shall be provided with standby power from the same
source as other required emergency systems for the
building.
708.14.2.6 Activation of pressurization system. The
elevator pressurization system shall be activated upon
activation of the building fire alarm system or upon acti-
vation of the elevator lobby smoke detectors. Where both
a building fire alarm system and elevator lobby smoke
detectors are present, each shall be independently capa-
ble of activating the pressurization system.
708.14.2.7 Special inspection. Special inspection for
performance shall be required in accordance with Sec-
tion 909.18.8. System acceptance shall be in accordance
with Section 909.19.
708.14.2.8 Marking and identification. Detection and
control systems shall be marked in accordance with Sec-
tion 909.14.
708.14.2.9 Control diagrams. Control diagrams shall
be provided in accordance with Section 909.15.
708.14.2.10 Control panel. A control panel complying
with Section 909.16 shall be provided.
708.14.2.11 System response time. Hoistway pressur-
ization systems shall comply with the requirements for
smoke control system response time in Section 909.17.

SECTION 709
FIRE PARTITIONS

709.1 General. The following wall assemblies shall comply
with this section.
1. Walls separating dwelling units in the same building as
required by Section 420.2.
2. Walls separating sleeping units in the same building as
required by Section 420.2.
3. Walls separating tenant spaces in covered mall buildings
as required by Section 402.7.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

107

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:03 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

4. Corridor walls as required by Section 1018.1.
5. E leva tor lobby separa tion as requ ired by Sec tion
708.14.1.
709.2 Materials. The walls shall be of materials permitted by
the building type of construction.
709.3 Fire-resistance rating. Fire partitions shall have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.
Exceptions:
1. Corridor walls permitted to have a 1/2 hour fire-resis-
tance rating by Table 1018.1.
2. Dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations in build-
ings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction shall have
fire-resistance ratings of not less than 1/2 hour in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
s p r i n k l e r s y s t em i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1.
709.4 Continuity. Fire partitions shall extend from the top of
the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the under-
side of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above or to the
fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly
above, and shall be securely attached thereto. If the partitions
are not continuous to the sheathing, deck or slab, and where
constructed of combustible construction, the space between the
ceiling and the sheathing , deck or slab above shall be
fireblocked or draftstopped in accordance with Sections 717.2
and 717.3 at the partition line. The supporting construction
shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating
of the wall supported, except for walls separating tenant spaces
in covered mall buildings, walls separating dwelling units,
walls separating sleeping units and corridor walls in buildings
of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction.
Exceptions:
1. The wall need not be extended into the crawl space
below where the floor above the crawl space has a
minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating.
2. Where the room-side fire-resistance-rated membrane
of the corridor is carried through to the underside of
the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab of a fire-resis-
tance-rated floor or roof above, the ceiling of the cor-
ridor shall be permitted to be protected by the use of
ceiling materials as required for a 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated floor or roof system.
3. Where the corridor ceiling is constructed as required
for the corridor walls, the walls shall be permitted to
terminate at the upper membrane of such ceiling
assembly.
4. The fire partitions separating tenant spaces in a cov-
ered mall building, complying with Section 402.7.2,
are not required to extend beyond the underside of a
ceiling that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assem-
bly. A wall is not required in attic or ceiling spaces
above tenant separation walls.
5. Fireblocking or draftstopping is not required at the
partition line in Group R-2 buildings that do not

exceed four stories above grade plane, provided the
attic space is subdivided by draftstopping into areas
not exceeding 3,000 square feet (279 m2) or above
every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller.
6. Fireblocking or draftstopping is not required at the
partition line in buildings equipped with an automatic
sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, provided that
automatic sprinklers are installed in combustible
floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling spaces.
709.5 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a
required fire-resistance-rated separation, such walls shall com-
ply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls, and
the fire-resistance-rated separation requirements shall not
apply.
Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance
rated in accordance with Section 1019.2 for exterior egress
balconies, Section 1022.6 for exit enclosures and Section
1026.6 for exterior exit ramps and stairways.
709.6 Openings. Openings in a fire partition shall be protected
in accordance with Section 715.
709.7 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire partitions shall com-
ply with Section 713.
709.8 Joints. Joints made in or between fire partitions shall
comply with Section 714.
709.9 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a fire
partition by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with
Section 716.

SECTION 710
SMOKE BARRIERS

710.1 General. Smoke barriers shall comply with this section.
710.2 Materials. Smoke barriers shall be of materials permit-
ted by the building type of construction.
710.3 Fire-resistance rating. A 1-hour fire-resistance rating
is required for smoke barriers.
Exception: Smoke barriers constructed of minimum
0.10-inch-thick (2.5 mm) steel in Group I-3 buildings.
710.4 Continuity. Smoke barriers shall form an effective
membrane continuous from outside wall to outside wall and
from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below
to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab
above, including continuity through concealed spaces, such as
those found above suspended ceilings, and interstitial struc-
tural and mechanical spaces. The supporting construction shall
be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the
wall or floor supported in buildings of other than Type IIB, IIIB
or VB construction.
Exception: Smoke-barrier walls are not required in intersti-
tial spaces where such spaces are designed and constructed
with ceilings that provide resistance to the passage of fire
and smoke equivalent to that provided by the smoke-barrier
walls.

108

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:04 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

710.5 Openings. Openings in a smoke barrier shall be pro-
tected in accordance with Section 715.
Exceptions:
1. In Group I-2, where doors are installed across corri-
dors, a pair of opposite-swinging doors without a cen-
ter mullion shall be installed having vision panels
w i th f i re -p ro tec t ion - ra ted g laz ing ma te r ia l s in
fire-protection-rated frames, the area of which shall
not exceed that tested. The doors shall be close fitting
within operational tolerances, and shall not have
undercuts in excess of 3/4-inch, louvers or grilles. The
doors shall have head and jamb stops, astragals or
rabbets at meeting edges and shall be automatic-clos-
ing by smoke detection in accordance with Section
715.4.8.3. Where permitted by the door manufac-
turer’s listing, positive-latching devices are not
required.
2. In Group I-2, horizontal sliding doors installed in
accordance with Section 1008.1.4.3 and protected in
accordance with Section 715.
710.6 Penetrations. Penetrations of smoke barriers shall com-
ply with Section 713.
710.7 Joints. Joints made in or between smoke barriers shall
comply with Section 714.
710.8 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a
smoke barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply
with Section 716.

SECTION 711
SMOKE PARTITIONS

711.1 General. Smoke partitions installed as required else-
where in the code shall comply with this section.
711.2 Materials. The walls shall be of materials permitted by
the building type of construction.
711.3 Fire-resistance rating. Unless required elsewhere in the
code, smoke partitions are not required to have a fire-resistance
rating.
711.4 Continuity. Smoke partitions shall extend from the top
of the foundation or floor below to the underside of the floor or
roof sheathing, deck or slab above or to the underside of the
ceiling above where the ceiling membrane is constructed to
limit the transfer of smoke.
711.5 Openings. Windows shall be sealed to resist the free pas-
sage of smoke or be automatic-closing upon detection of smoke.
Doors in smoke partitions shall comply with this section.
711.5.1 Louvers. Doors in smoke partitions shall not
include louvers.
711.5.2 Smoke and draft control doors. Where required
elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall meet
the requirements for a smoke and draft control door assem-
bly tested in accordance with UL 1784. The air leakage rate
of the door assembly shall not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per min-
ute per square foot (0.015424 m3/(s × m2)) of door opening at
0.10 inch (24.9 Pa) of water for both the ambient tempera-

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

ture test and the elevated temperature exposure test.
Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with
NFPA 105.
711.5.3 Self- or automatic-closing doors. Where required
elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall be
self- or automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance
with Section 715.4.8.3.
711.6 Penetrations and joints. The space around penetrating
items and in joints shall be filled with an approved material to
limit the free passage of smoke.
711.7 Ducts and air transfer openings. The space around a
duct penetrating a smoke partition shall be filled with an
approved material to limit the free passage of smoke. Air trans-
fer openings in smoke partitions shall be provided with a smoke
damper complying with Section 716.3.2.2.
Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper will
interfere with the operation of a required smoke control sys-
tem in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative
protection shall be utilized.

SECTION 712
HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES

712.1 General. Floor and roof assemblies required to have a
f i re - re s i s ta n c e ra t in g sh a l l comp ly w i th th i s s e c t io n .
Nonfire-resistance-rated floor and roof assemblies shall com-
ply with Section 713.4.2.
712.2 Materials. The floor and roof assemblies shall be of
materials permitted by the building type of construction.
712.3 Fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating of
floor and roof assemblies shall not be less than that required by
the building type of construction. Where the floor assembly
separates mixed occupancies, the assembly shall have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section
508.4 based on the occupancies being separated. Where the
floor assembly separates a single occupancy into different fire
areas, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not
less than that required by Section 707.3.9. Horizontal assem-
blies separating dwelling units in the same building and hori-
zontal assemblies separating sleeping units in the same
building shall be a minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction.
Exception: Dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations in
buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction shall have
fire-resistance ratings of not less than 1/2 hour in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
712.3.1 Ceiling panels. Where the weight of lay-in ceiling
panels, used as part of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or
roof/ceiling assemblies, is not adequate to resist an upward
force of 1 pound per square foot (48 Pa), wire or other
approved devices shall be installed above the panels to pre-
vent vertical displacement under such upward force.
712.3.2 Access doors. Access doors shall be permitted in
ceilings of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceil-
ing assemblies provided such doors are tested in accordance

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

109

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:04 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 as horizontal assemblies and
labeled by an approved agency for such purpose.
712.3.3 Unusable space. In 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
floor assemblies, the ceiling membrane is not required to be
installed over unusable crawl spaces. In 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated roof assemblies, the floor membrane is not
required to be installed where unusable attic space occurs
above.
712.4 Continuity. Assemblies shall be continuous without
openings, penetrations or joints except as permitted by this sec-
tion and Sections 708.2, 713.4, 714 and 1022.1. Skylights and
other penetrations through a fire-resistance-rated roof deck or
slab are permitted to be unprotected, provided that the struc-
tural integrity of the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly is
maintained. Unprotected skylights shall not be permitted in
roof assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated in accor-
dance with Section 704.10. The supporting construction shall
be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the
horizontal assembly supported.
Exception: In buildings of Type IIB, IIIB or VB construc-
tion, the construction supporting the horizontal assembly is
not required to be fire-resistance-rated at the following:
1. Horizontal assemblies at the separations of incidental
uses as specified by Table 508.2.5, provided the
required fire-resistance rating does not exceed 1
hour.
2. Horizontal assemblies at the separations of dwelling
units and sleeping units as required by Section 420.3.
3. Horizontal assemblies at smoke barriers constructed
in accordance with Section 710.
712.5 Penetrations. Penetrations of horizontal assemblies
shall comply with Section 713.
712.6 Joints. Joints made in or between horizontal assemblies
shall comply with Section 714. The void created at the intersec-
tion of a floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall
assembly shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.
712.7 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in hori-
zontal assemblies by ducts and air transfer openings shall com-
ply with Section 716.
712.8 Floor fire door assemblies. Floor fire door assemblies
used to protect openings in fire-resistance-rated floors shall be
tested in accordance with NFPA 288, and shall achieve a
fire-resistance rating not less than the assembly being pene-
trated. Floor fire door assemblies shall be labeled by an
approved agency. The label shall be permanently affixed and
shall specify the manufacturer, the test standard and the
fire-resistance rating.
712.9 Smoke barrier. Where horizontal assemblies are
required to resist the movement of smoke by other sections of
this code in accordance with the definition of smoke barrier,
penetrations and joints in such horizontal assemblies shall be
protected as required for smoke barriers in accordance with
Sections 713.5 and 714.6. Regardless of the number of stories
connected by elevator shaft enclosures, doors located in eleva-
tor shaft enclosures that penetrate the horizontal assembly shall
be protected by enclosed elevator lobbies complying with Sec-

tion 708.14.1. Openings through horizontal assemblies shall
be protected by shaft enclosures complying with Section 708.
Horizontal assemblies shall not be allowed to have unprotected
vertical openings.

SECTION 713
PENETRATIONS

713.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
materials and methods of construction used to protect through
penetrations and membrane penetrations of horizontal assem-
blies and fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies.
713.1.1 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations of
fire-resistance-rated walls by ducts that are not protected
with dampers shall comply with Sections 713.2 through
713.3.3. Penetrations of horizontal assemblies not pro-
tected with a shaft as permitted by Exception 4 of Section
708.2, and not required to be protected with fire dampers by
other sections of this code, shall comply with Sections 713.4
through 713.4.2.2. Ducts and air transfer openings that are
protected with dampers shall comply with Section 716.
713.2 Installation details. Where sleeves are used, they shall
be securely fastened to the assembly penetrated. The space
between the item contained in the sleeve and the sleeve itself
and any space between the sleeve and the assembly penetrated
shall be protected in accordance with this section. Insulation
and coverings on or in the penetrating item shall not penetrate
the assembly unless the specific material used has been tested
as part of the assembly in accordance with this section.
713.3 Fire-resistance-rated walls. Penetrations into or

through fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barrier walls and fire
partitions shall comply with Sections 713.3.1 through 713.3.3.
Penetrations in smoke barrier walls shall also comply with
Section 713.5.
713.3.1 Through penetrations. Through penetrations of
fire-resistance-rated walls shall comply with Section
713.3.1.1 or 713.3.1.2.
Exception: Where the penetrating items are steel, fer-
rous or copper pipes, tubes or conduits, the annular
space between the penetrating item and the fire-resis-
tance-rated wall is permitted to be protected as follows:
1. In concrete or masonry walls where the penetrat-
ing item is a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) nominal
diameter and the area of the opening through the
wall does not exceed 144 square inches (0.0929
m2), concrete, grout or mortar is permitted where it
is installed the full thickness of the wall or the
thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance
rating; or
2. The material used to fill the annular space shall
prevent the passage of flame and hot gases suffi-
cient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire
conditions under a minimum positive pressure dif-
ferential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water at the loca-
t ion o f the pene t ra t ion fo r the t ime pe r iod

110

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:05 PM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the con-
struction penetrated.
713.3.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Penetra-
tions shall be installed as tested in an approved fire-resis-
tance-rated assembly.
713 .3 .1 .2 Through -pene tra t ion fires top sys tem .

Through penetrations shall be protected by an approved
penetration firestop system installed as tested in accor-
dance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479, with a minimum
positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of
water and shall have an F rating of not less than the
required fire-resistance rating of the wall penetrated.
713.3.2 Membrane penetrations. Membrane penetrations
shall comply with Section 713.3.1. Where walls or parti-
tions are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed
fixtures shall be installed such that the required fire-resis-
tance will not be reduced.
Exceptions:
1. Membrane pene tra tions of max imum 2-hour
fire-resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel
electrical boxes that do not exceed 16 square
inches (0.0103 m2) in area, provided the aggregate
area of the openings through the membrane does
not exceed 100 square inches (0.0645 m2) in any
100 square feet (9.29 m2) of wall area. The annular
space between the wall membrane and the box
shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.1 mm). Such boxes on
opposite sides of the wall or partition shall be sepa-
rated by one of the following:
1.1. By a horizontal distance of not less than 24
inches (610 mm) where the wall or parti-
t i o n i s c o n s t r u c t e d w i t h i n d i v i d u a l
noncommunicating stud cavities;
1.2. By a horizontal distance of not less than the
depth of the wall cavity where the wall cav-
i ty is f i l led w i th ce l lu lo se loo se - f i l l ,
rockwool or slag mineral wool insulation;
1.3. By solid fireblocking in accordance with
Section 717.2.1;
1.4. By protecting both outlet boxes with listed
putty pads; or
1.5. By other listed materials and methods.
2. Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes
of any material, provided such boxes have been
tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies
and are installed in accordance with the instruc-
tions included in the listing. The annular space
between the wall membrane and the box shall not
exceed 1/8 inch (3.1 mm) unless listed otherwise.
Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall or parti-
tion shall be separated by one of the following:
2.1. By the horizontal distance specified in the
listing of the electrical boxes;
2.2. By solid fireblocking in accordance with
Section 717.2.1;

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2.3. By protecting both boxes with listed putty
pads; or
2.4. By other listed materials and methods.
3. Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of any
size or type, which have been listed as part of a
wall opening protective material system for use in
fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed
in accordance with the instructions included in the
listing.
4. Membrane penetrations by boxes other than elec-
trical boxes, provided such penetrating items and
the annular space between the wall membrane and
the box, are protected by an approved membrane
penetration firestop system installed as tested in
accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479, with a
minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01
inch (2.49 Pa) of water, and shall have an F and T
rating of not less than the required fire-resistance
rating of the wall penetrated and be installed in
accordance with their listing.
5. The annular space created by the penetration of an
automatic sprinkler, provided it is covered by a
metal escutcheon plate.
713.3.3 Dissimilar materials. Noncombustible penetrating
items shall not connect to combustible items beyond the
point of firestopping unless it can be demonstrated that the
fire-resistance integrity of the wall is maintained.
713 .4 Hor izon ta l assemb l ies . Pene tra t ions o f a f loo r,
floor/ceiling assembly or the ceiling membrane of a roof/ceil-
ing assembly not required to be enclosed in a shaft by Section
708.2 shall be protected in accordance with Sections 713.4.1
through 713.4.2.2.
713.4.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Penetrations of
the fire-resistance-rated floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the
ceiling membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly shall comply
with Sections 713.4.1.1 through 713.4.1.4. Penetrations in
horizontal smoke barriers shall also comply with 713.5.
713.4.1.1 Through penetrations. Through penetrations
of fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies shall com-
ply with Section 713.4.1.1.1 or 713.4.1.1.2.
Exceptions:
1. Penetrations by steel, ferrous or copper con-
duits, pipes, tubes or vents or concrete or
masonry items through a single fire-resistance-
rated floor assembly where the annular space is
protected with materials that prevent the pas-
sage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite
cotton waste when subjected to ASTM E 119 or
UL 263 time-temperature fire conditions under
a minimum positive pressure differential of
0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water at the location of
the penetration for the time period equivalent to
the fire-resistance rating of the construction
penetrated. Penetrating items with a maximum
6-inch (152 mm) nominal diameter shall not be
limited to the penetration of a single fire-resis-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

111

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:05 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

tance-rated floor assembly, provided the aggre-
gate area of the openings through the assembly
does not exceed 144 square inches (92 900
mm2) in any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor
area.
2. Penetrations in a single concrete floor by steel,
ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents
with a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) nominal
diameter, provided the concrete, grout or mor-
tar is installed the full thickness of the floor or
t h e t h i c k n e s s r e q u i r e d t o m a i n t a i n t h e
fire-resistance rating. The penetrating items
shall not be limited to the penetration of a single
concrete floor, provided the area of the opening
through each floor does not exceed 144 square
inches (92 900 mm2).
3. Penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any
material, provided such boxes have been tested
for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and
installed in accordance with the instructions
included in the listing.
713.4.1.1.1 Installation. Through penetrations shall
be installed as tested in the approved fire-resis-
tance-rated assembly.
713.4.1.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system.
Through pene tra tions sha l l be pro tec ted by an
a p p rov e d th ro u g h - p e n e t ra t io n f i re s to p s y s t em
installed and tested in accordance with ASTM E 814
or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differ-
ential of 0.01 inch of water (2.49 Pa). The system shall
have an F rating/T rating of not less than 1 hour but not
less than the required rating of the floor penetrated.
Exception: Floor penetrations contained and
located within the cavity of a wall above the floor
or below the floor do not require a T rating.
713.4.1.2 Membrane penetrations. Penetrations of
membranes that are part of a horizontal assembly shall
comply with Section 713.4.1.1.1 or 713.4.1.1.2. Where
floor/ceiling assemblies are required to have a fire-resis-
tance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed such that
the required fire resistance will not be reduced.
Exceptions:

1. Membrane penetrations by steel, ferrous or
copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents, or con-
crete or masonry items where the annular space
is protected either in accordance with Section
713.4.1.1 or to prevent the free passage of
flame and the products of combustion. The
aggregate area of the openings through the
membrane shall not exceed 100 square inches
(64 500 mm2) in any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of
ceiling area in assemblies tested without pene-
trations.
2. Ceiling membrane penetrations of maximum
2-hour horizontal assemblies by steel electrical

boxes that do not exceed 16 square inches (10
323 mm2) in area, provided the aggregate area
of such penetrations does not exceed 100
square inches (44 500 mm2) in any 100 square
feet (9.29 m2) of ceiling area, and the annular
space between the ceiling membrane and the
box does not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).
3. Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of
any size or type, which have been listed as part
of an opening protective material system for
use in horizontal assemblies and are installed in
accordance with the instructions included in the
listing.
4. Membrane penetrations by listed electrical
boxes of any material, provided such boxes
have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated
assemblies and are installed in accordance with
the instructions included in the listing. The
annular space between the ceiling membrane
and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm)
unless listed otherwise.
5. The annular space created by the penetration of
a fire sprinkler, provided it is covered by a
metal eschutcheon plate.
713.4.1.3 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetra-
tions of horizontal assemblies by ducts and air transfer
openings shall comply with Section 716.
713.4.1.4 Dissimilar materials. Noncombustible pene-
trating items shall not connect to combustible materials
beyond the point of firestopping unless it can be demon-
strated that the fire-resistance integrity of the horizontal
assembly is maintained.
713.4.2 Nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies. Penetra-
tions of nonfire-resistance-rated floor or
floor/ceiling
assemblies or the ceiling membrane of a nonfire-resistance-
rated roof/ceiling assembly shall meet the requirements of
Section 708 or shall comply with Section 713.4.2.1 or
713.4.2.2.
7 1 3 . 4 . 2 . 1 N o n c om bu s t i b l e p e n e t r a t i n g i t em s .
Noncombustible penetrating items that connect not more
than three stories are permitted, provided that the annu-
lar space is filled to resist the free passage of flame and
t h e p r o d u c t s o f c om b u s t i o n w i t h a n a p p ro v e d
noncombustible material or with a fill, void or cavity
m a t e r i a l th a t i s t e s t ed an d c l a s s i f i ed fo r u s e in
through-penetration firestop systems.
713.4.2.2 Penetrating items. Penetrating items that con-
nect not more than two stories are permitted, provided
that the annular space is filled with an approved material
to resist the free passage of flame and the products of
combustion.
713.5 Penetrations in smoke barriers. Penetrations in smoke
barriers shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of
UL 1479 for air leakage. The air leakage rate of the penetration
assemblies measured at 0.30 inch (7.47 Pa) of water in both the

112

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:06 PM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests, shall not
exceed:
1. 5.0 cfm per square foot (0.025m3 / s × m2) of penetration
opening for each through-penetration firestop system; or
2. A total cumulative leakage of 50 cfm (0.024m3/s) for any
100 square feet (9.3 m2) of wall area, or floor area.

SECTION 714
FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEMS

714.1 General. Joints installed in or between fire-resis-
tance-rated walls, floor or floor/ceiling assemblies and roofs or
roof/ceiling assemblies shall be protected by an approved
fire-resistant joint system designed to resist the passage of fire
for a time period not less than the required fire-resistance rat-
ing of the wall, floor or roof in or between which it is installed.
Fire-resistant joint systems shall be tested in accordance with
Section 714.3. The void created at the intersection of a
floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assembly
shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.
Exception: Fire-resistant joint systems shall not be required
for joints in all of the following locations:
1. Floors within a single dwelling unit.
2. Floors where the joint is protected by a shaft enclo-
sure in accordance with Section 708.
3. Floors within atriums where the space adjacent to the
atrium is included in the volume of the atrium for
smoke control purposes.
4. Floors within malls.
5. Floors and ramps within open and enclosed parking
garages or structures constructed in accordance with
Sections 406.3 and 406.4, respectively.
6. Mezzanine floors.
7. Walls that are permitted to have unprotected open-
ings.
8. Roofs where openings are permitted.
9. Control joints not exceeding a maximum width of
0.625 inch (15.9 mm) and tested in accordance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263.
714.2 Installation. Fire-resistant joint systems shall be
securely installed in or on the joint for its entire length so as not
to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to accommo-
date expected building movements and to resist the passage of
fire and hot gases.
714.3 Fire test criteria. Fire-resistant joint systems shall be
tested in accordance with the requirements of either ASTM E
1966 or UL 2079. Nonsymmetrical wall joint systems shall be
tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned
fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration obtained
from the two tests. When evidence is furnished to show that the
wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side exposed to the

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

furnace, subject to acceptance of the building official, the wall
need not be subjected to tests from the opposite side.
Exception: For exterior walls with a horizontal fire separa-
tion distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), the joint system
shall be required to be tested for interior fire exposure only.
714.4 Exterior curtain wall/floor intersection. Where fire
resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies are required,
voids created at the intersection of the exterior curtain wall
assemblies and such floor assemblies shall be sealed with an
approved system to prevent the interior spread of fire. Such
systems shall be securely installed and tested in accordance
with ASTM E 2307 to prevent the passage of flame for the time
period at least equal to the fire-resistance rating of the floor
assembly and prevent the passage of heat and hot gases suffi-
cient to ignite cotton waste. Height and fire-resistance require-
ments for curtain wall spandrels shall comply with Section
705.8.5.
714.4.1 Exterior curtain wall/nonfire-resistance-rated
floor assembly intersections. Voids created at the intersec-
tion of exterior curtain wall assemblies and nonfire-resis-
tance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies shall be sealed
with an approved material or system to retard the interior
spread of fire and hot gases between stories.
714.5 Spandrel wall. Height and fire-resistance requirements
for curtain wall spandrels shall comply with Section 705.8.5.
Where Section 705.8.5 does not require a fire-resistance-rated
spandrel wall, the requirements of Section 714.4 shall still
apply to the intersection between the spandrel wall and the
floor.
714.6 Fire-resistant joint systems in smoke barriers.
Fire-resistant joint systems in smoke barriers, and joints at the
intersection of a horizontal smoke barrier and an exterior cur-
tain wall, shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of
UL 2079 for air leakage. The air leakage rate of the joint shall
not exceed 5 cfm per lineal foot (0.00775 m3/s × m) of joint at
0.30 inch (7.47 Pa) of water for both the ambient temperature
and elevated temperature tests.

SECTION 715
OPENING PROTECTIVES

715.1 General. Opening protectives required by other sections
of this code shall comply with the provisions of this section.
715.2 Fire-resistance-rated glazing. Fire-resistance-rated
glazing tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly in
accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and labeled in accor-
dance with Section 703.5 shall be permitted in fire doors and
fire window assemblies in accordance with their listings and
shall not otherwise be required to comply with this section.
715.3 Alternative methods for determining fire protection
ratings. The application of any of the alternative methods
listed in this section shall be based on the fire exposure and
acceptance criteria specified in NFPA 252, NFPA 257 or UL 9.
The required fire resistance of an opening protective shall be

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

113

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:06 PM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

permitted to be established by any of the following methods or
procedures:
1. Designs documented in approved sources.
2. Calculations performed in an approved manner.
3. Engineering analysis based on a comparison of opening
protective designs having fire protection ratings as
determined by the test procedures set forth in NFPA 252,
NFPA 257 or UL 9.
4. Alternative protection methods as allowed by Section
104.11.
715.4 Fire door and shutter assemblies. Approved fire door
and fire shutter assemblies shall be constructed of any material
or assembly of component materials that conforms to the test
requirements of Section 715.4.1, 715.4.2 or 715.4.3 and the fire
protection rating indicated in Table 715.4. Fire door frames
with transom lights, sidelights or both shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 715.4.5. Fire door assemblies and
shutters shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of
this section and NFPA 80.
Exceptions:
1. Labeled protective assemblies that conform to the
requirements of this section or UL 10A, UL 14B and
UL 14C for tin-clad fire door assemblies.
2. Floor fire door assemblies in accordance with Section
712.8.
715.4.1 Side-hinged or pivoted swinging doors. Fire door
assemblies with side-hinged and pivoted swinging doors
shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C.
After 5 minutes into the NFPA 252 test, the neutral pressure

level in the furnace shall be established at 40 inches (1016
mm) or less above the sill.
715.4.2 Other types of assemblies. Fire door assemblies
with other types of doors, including swinging elevator doors
and fire shutter assemblies, shall be tested in accordance
with NFPA 252 or UL 10B. The pressure in the furnace shall
be maintained as nearly equal to the atmospheric pressure as
possible. Once established, the pressure shall be maintained
during the entire test period.
715.4.3 Door assemblies in corridors and smoke barri-
ers. Fire door assemblies required to have a minimum fire
protection rating of 20 minutes where located in corridor
walls or smoke barrier walls having a fire-resistance rating
in accordance with Table 715.4 shall be tested in accordance
with NFPA 252 or UL 10C without the hose stream test.
Exceptions:
1. Viewports that require a hole not larger than 1 inch
(25 mm) in diameter through the door, have at least
a 0.25-inch-thick (6.4 mm) glass disc and the
holder is of metal that will not melt out where sub-
ject to temperatures of 1,700°F (927°C).
2. Corridor door assemblies in occupancies of Group
I-2 shall be in accordance with Section 407.3.1.
3. Unprotected openings shall be permitted for corri-
dors in multitheater complexes where each motion
picture auditorium has at least one-half of its
required exit or exit access doorways opening
directly to the exterior or into an exit passageway.
4. Horizontal sliding doors in smoke barriers that
comply with Sections 408.3 and 408.8.4 in occu-
pancies in Group I-3.

TABLE 715.4
FIRE DOOR AND FIRE SHUTTER FIRE PROTECTION RATINGS

TYPE OF ASSEMBLY

REQUIRED ASSEMBLY RATING
(hours)

MINIMUM FIRE DOOR AND FIRE
SHUTTER ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)

Fire walls and fire barriers having a required fire-resistance
rating greater than 1 hour

Fire barriers having a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour:
Shaft, exit enclosure and exit passageway walls
Other fire barriers

Fire partitions:
Corridor walls

Other fire partitions

Exterior walls

Smoke barriers

4
3
2
11/2

1
1

1
0.5
1
0.5

3
2
1

1

3
3a
11/2
11/2

1

3/4

b

1/3
1/3
b
3/4
1/3

11/2
11/2

3/4
1/3
b

a. Two doors, each with a fire protection rating of 11/2 hours, installed on opposite sides of the same opening in a fire wall, shall be deemed equivalent in fire protection
rating to one 3-hour fire door.
b. For testing requirements, see Section 715.4.3.

114

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:07 PM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

715.4.3.1 Smoke and draft control. Fire door assem-
blies shall also meet the requirements for a smoke and
draft control door assembly tested in accordance with
UL 1784. The air leakage rate of the door assembly shall
not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per minute per square foot
(0.01524 m3/s · m2) of door opening at 0.10 inch (24.9
Pa) of water for both the ambient temperature and ele-
vated temperature tests. Louvers shall be prohibited.
Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with
NFPA 105.
715.4.3.2 Glazing in door assemblies. In a 20-minute
fire door assembly, the glazing material in the door itself
shall have a minimum fire-protection-rated glazing of 20
minutes and shall be exempt from the hose stream test.
Glazing material in any other part of the door assembly,
including transom lights and sidelights, shall be tested in
accordance with NFPA 257 or UL 9, including the hose
stream test, in accordance with Section 715.5.
715.4.4 Doors in exit enclosures and exit passageways.
Fire door assemblies in exit enclosures and exit passage-
ways shall have a maximum transmitted temperature end
point of not more than 450ºF (250ºC) above ambient at the
end of 30 minutes of standard fire test exposure.
Exception: The maximum transmitted temperature rise
is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
715.4.4.1 Glazing in doors. Fire-protection-rated glaz-
ing in excess of 100 square inches (0.065 m2) shall be
permitted in fire door assemblies when tested as compo-
nents of the door assemblies and not as glass lights, and
shall have a maximum transmitted temperature rise of
450ºF (250ºC) in accordance with Section 715.4.4.
Exception: The maximum transmitted temperature
rise is not required in buildings equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
715.4.5 Fire door frames with transom lights and side-
lights. Door frames with transom lights, sidelights, or both,
shall be permitted where a 3/4-hour fire protection rating or
less is required in accordance with Table 715.4. Where a fire
protection rating exceeding 3/4-hour is required in accor-
dance with Table 715.4, fire door frames with transom
lights, sidelights, or both, shall be permitted where installed
with fire-resistance-rated glazing tested as an assembly in
accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.
715.4.6 Labeled protective assemblies. Fire door assem-
blies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The labels
shall comply with NFPA 80, and shall be permanently
affixed to the door or frame.
715.4.6.1 Fire door labeling requirements. Fire doors
shall be labeled showing the name of the manufacturer or
other identification readily traceable back to the manu-
facturer, the name or trademark of the third-party inspec-
tion agency, the fire protection rating and, where

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

required for fire doors in exit enclosures and exit
passageways by Section 715.4.4, the maximum trans-
mitted temperature end point. Smoke and draft control
doors complying with UL 1784 shall be labeled as such
and shall also comply with Section 715.4.6.3. Labels
shall be approved and permanently affixed. The label
shall be applied at the factory or location where fabrica-
tion and assembly are performed.
715.4.6.2 Oversized doors. Oversized fire doors shall

bear an oversized fire door label by an approved agency
or shall be provided with a certificate of inspection fur-
nished by an approved testing agency. When a certificate
of inspection is furnished by an approved testing agency,
the certificate shall state that the door conforms to the
requirements of design, materials and construction, but
has not been subjected to the fire test.
715.4.6.3 Smoke and draft control door labeling
requirements. Smoke and draft control doors comply-
ing with UL 1784 shall be labeled in accordance with
Section 715.4.6.1 and shall show the letter “S” on the fire
rating label of the door. This marking shall indicate that
the door and frame assembly are in compliance when
listed or labeled gasketing is also installed.
715.4.6.4 Fire door frame labeling requirements. Fire
door frames shall be labeled showing the names of the
manufacturer and the third-party inspection agency.
715.4.7 Glazing material. Fire-protection-rated glazing
conforming to the opening protection requirements in Sec-
tion 715.4 shall be permitted in fire door assemblies.
715.4.7.1 Size limitations. Fire-protection-rated glazing
used in fire doors shall comply with the size limitations
of NFPA 80.
Exceptions:
1. Fire-protection-rated glazing in fire doors
located in fire walls shall be prohibited except
where serving in a fire door in a horizontal exit,
a self-closing swinging door shall be permitted
to have a vision panel of not more than 100
square inches (0.065 m2) without a dimension
exceeding 10 inches (254 mm).
2. F ire-pro tec t ion-ra ted g laz ing sha l l no t be
installed in fire doors having a 11/2-hour fire
protection rating intended for installation in
fire barriers, unless the glazing is not more than
100 square inches (0.065 m2) in area.
715.4.7.2 Exit and elevator protectives. Approved
fire-protection-rated glazing used in fire door assemblies
in elevator and exit enclosures shall be so located as to
furnish clear vision of the passageway or approach to the
elevator, ramp or stairway.
715.4.7.3 Labeling. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall
bear a label or other identification showing the name of
the manufacturer, the test standard and information
required in Section 715.5.9.1 that shall be issued by an

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

115

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:07 PM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

approved agency and shall be permanently affixed to the
glazing.

715.4.7.3.1 Identification. For fire protection-rated
glazing, the label shall bear the following four-part
identification: “D – H or NH – T or NT – XXX.” “D”
indicates that the glazing shall be used in fire door
assemblies and that the glazing meets the fire protec-
tion requirements of NFPA 252. “H” shall indicate
that the glazing meets the hose stream requirements of
NFPA 252. “NH” shall indicate that the glazing does
not meet the hose stream requirements of the test. “T”
shall indicate that the glazing meets the temperature
requirements of Section 715.4.4.1. “NT” shall indi-
cate that the glazing does not meet the temperature
requirements of Section 715.4.4.1. The placeholder
“XXX” sha l l spec i fy the fi re -p ro tec t ion - ra t ing
period, in minutes.

715.4.7.4 Safety glazing. Fire-protection-rated glazing
installed in fire doors in areas subject to human impact in
hazardous locations shall comply with Chapter 24.

715.4.8 Door closing. Fire doors shall be self- or auto-
matic-closing in accordance with this section.

Exceptions:

1. Fire doors located in common walls separating
sleeping units in Group R-1 shall be permitted
without automatic- or self-closing devices.
2. The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway
enclosure doors at the floor level designated for
recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be
permitted to remain open during Phase I emer-
gency recall operation.
715.4.8.1 Latch required. Unless otherwise specifically
permitted, single fire doors and both leaves of pairs of
side-hinged swinging fire doors shall be provided with
an active latch bolt that will secure the door when it is
closed.

715.4.8.2 Automatic-closing fire door assemblies.
Au toma t ic -c lo s ing fi re doo r a s semb l ie s sh a l l b e
self-closing in accordance with NFPA 80.

715.4.8.3 Smoke-activated doors. Automatic-closing
doors installed in the following locations shall be auto-
matic-closing by the actuation of smoke detectors
installed in accordance with Section 907.3 or by loss of
power to the smoke detector or hold-open device. Doors
that are automatic-closing by smoke detection shall not
have more than a 10-second delay before the door starts
to close after the smoke detector is actuated:

1. Doors installed across a corridor.
2. Doors that protect openings in exits or corridors
required to be of fire-resistance-rated construc-
tion.

3. Doors that protect openings in walls that are
capable of resisting the passage of smoke in
accordance with Section 508.2.5.2.
4. Doors installed in smoke barriers in accordance
with Section 710.5.
5. Doors installed in fire partitions in accordance
with Section 709.6.
6. Doors installed in a fire wall in accordance with
Section 706.8.
7. Doors installed in shaft enclosures in accordance
with Section 708.7.
8. Doors installed in refuse and laundry chutes and
access and termination rooms in accordance with
Section 708.13.
9. D o o r s
i n s t a l l e d
i n
t h e w a l l s
f o r
compartmentation of underground buildings in
accordance with Section 405.4.2.
10. Doors installed in the elevator lobby walls of
underground buildings in accordance with Sec-
tion 405.4.3.
11. Doors installed in smoke partitions in accordance
with Section 711.5.3.
715.4.8.4 Doors in pedestrian ways. Vertical sliding or
vertical rolling steel fire doors in openings through
which pedestrians travel shall be heat activated or acti-
vated by smoke detectors with alarm verification.
715.4.9 Swinging fire shutters. Where fire shutters of the
swinging type are installed in exterior openings, not less
than one row in every three vertical rows shall be arranged to
be readily opened from the outside, and shall be identified
by distinguishing marks or letters not less than 6 inches (152
mm) high.
715.4.10 Rolling fire shutters. Where fire shutters of the
rolling type are installed, such shutters shall
include
approved automatic-closing devices.
715.5 Fire-protection-rated glazing. Glazing in fire window
assemblies shall be fire-protection rated in accordance with
this section and Table 715.5. Glazing in fire door assemblies
shall comply with Section 715.4.7. Fire-protection-rated glaz-
ing shall be tested in accordance with and shall meet the accep-
tance criteria of NFPA 257 or UL 9. Fire-protection-rated
glazing shall also comply with NFPA 80 . Openings in
nonfire-resistance-rated exterior wall assemblies that require
protection in accordance with Section 705.3, 705.8, 705.8.5 or
705.8.6 shall have a fire-protection rating of not less than 3/4
hour.
Exceptions:
1. Wired glass in accordance with Section 715.5.4.
2. Fire protection-rated glazing in 0.5-hour fire-resis-
tan ce - ra ted p a r t i t ion s i s p e rm i t ted to h av e an
0.33-hour fire-protection rating.

116

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:08 PM

24

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 715.5
FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY FIRE PROTECTION RATINGS

TABLE 715.5.4
LIMITING SIZES OF WIRED GLASS PANELS

TYPE OF ASSEMBLY

REQUIRED
ASSEMBLY
RATING (hours)

MINIMUM FIRE
WINDOW
ASSEMBLY
RATING (hours)

Fire walls

Fire barriers

Smoke barriers

Fire partitions

Interior walls:

Exterior walls

Party wall

All

> 1
1

1

1

1/2

> 1
1

All

NP = Not Permitted.
a. Not permitted except as specified in Section 715.2.

NPa

NPa

3/4
3/4

3/4
1/3

11/2

3/4

NP

715.5.1 Testing under positive pressure. NFPA 257 or UL
9 shall evaluate fire-protection-rated glazing under positive
pressure. Within the first 10 minutes of a test, the pressure in
the furnace shall be adjusted so at least two-thirds of the test
specimen is above the neutral pressure plane, and the neutral
pressure plane shall be maintained at that height for the bal-
ance of the test.

715.5.2 Nonsymmetrical glazing systems. Nonsymmetri-
cal fire-protection-rated glazing systems in fire partitions,
fire barriers or in exterior walls with a fire separation dis-
tance of 5 feet (1524 mm) or less pursuant to Section 705
shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and
the assigned fire protection rating shall be the shortest dura-
tion obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance
with NFPA 257 or UL 9.

715.5.3 Safety glazing. Fire-protection-rated glazing
installed in fire window assemblies in areas subject to
human impact in hazardous locations shall comply with
Chapter 24.

715.5.4 Wired glass. Steel window frame assemblies of
0.125-inch (3.2 mm) minimum solid section or of not less
than nominal 0.048-inch-thick (1.2 mm) formed sheet steel
members fabricated by pressing, mitering, riveting, inter-
locking or welding and having provision for glazing with
1/4-inch (6.4 mm) wired glass where securely installed in the
building construction and glazed with 1/4-inch (6.4 mm)
labeled wired glass shall be deemed to meet the require-
ments for a 3/4-hour fire window assembly. Wired glass pan-
els shall conform to the size limitations set forth in Table
715.5.4.

715.5.5 Nonwired glass. Glazing other than wired glass in
fire window assemblies shall be fire-protection-rated glaz-
ing installed in accordance with and complying with the size
limitations set forth in NFPA 80.

OPENING FIRE
PROTECTION
RATING

MAXIMUM
AREA
(square inches)

MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
(inches)

MAXIMUM
WIDTH
(inches)

3 hours
11/2-hour doors in
exterior walls
1 and 11/2 hours
3/4 hour
20 minutes
Fire window
assemblies

0

0

0

0

0

0

100
1,296
Not Limited

33
10
54
54
Not Limited Not Limited

1,296

54

54

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.2 mm2.

715.5.7 Window mullions. Metal mullions that exceed a
nominal height of 12 feet (3658 mm) shall be protected with
materials to afford the same fire-resistance rating as
required for the wall construction in which the protective is
located.
715.5.8 Interior fire window assemblies. Fire-protec-
tion-rated glazing used in fire window assemblies located in
fire partitions and fire barriers shall be limited to use in
assemblies with a maximum fire-resistance rating of 1 hour
in accordance with this section.
715.5.8.1 Where 3/4-hour fire protection window
assemblies permitted. Fire-protection-rated glazing
requiring 45-minute opening protection in accordance
with Table 715.5 shall be limited to fire partitions
designed in accordance with Section 709 and fire barri-
ers utilized in the applications set forth in Sections
707.3.6 and 707.3.8 where the fire-resistance rating does
not exceed 1 hour.
715.5.8.2 Area limitations. The total area of windows
shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of a common wall
with any room.
715.5.9 Labeling requirements. Fire-protection-rated
glazing shall bear a label or other identification showing the
name of the manufacturer, the test standard and information
required in Section 715.5.9.1 that shall be issued by an
approved agency and shall be permanently affixed to the
glazing.
715.5.9.1 Identification. For fire-protection-rated glaz-
ing, the label shall bear the following two-part identifica-
tion: “OH – XXX.” “OH” indicates that the glazing
meets both the fire protection and the hose-stream
requirements of NFPA 257 or UL 9 and is permitted to be
used in openings. “XXX” represents the fire-protection
rating period, in minutes, that was tested.

SECTION 716
DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS

715.5.6 Installation. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be
in the fixed position or be automatic-closing and shall be
installed in approved frames.

716.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
protection of duct penetrations and air transfer openings in
assemblies required to be protected.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

117

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:08 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

716.1.1 Ducts
that penetrate
fire-resistance-rated
assemblies without dampers. Ducts
that penetrate
fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are not required by this
section to have dampers shall comply with the requirements
of Sections 713.2 through 713.3.3. Ducts that penetrate hor-
izontal assemblies not required to be contained within a
shaft and not required by this section to have dampers shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 713.4 through
713.4.2.2.
7 1 6 . 1 . 1 . 1 D u c t s t h a t p e n e t r a t e n o n f i re - re s i s-
tance-rated assemblies. The space around a duct pene-
trating a nonfire-resistance-rated floor assembly shall
comply with Section 716.6.3.
716.2 Installation. Fire dampers, smoke dampers, combina-
tion fire/smoke dampers and ceiling radiation dampers located
within air distribution and smoke control systems shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of this section,
the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the dampers’
listing.
716.2.1 Smoke control system. Where the installation of a
fire damper will interfere with the operation of a required
smoke control system in accordance with Section 909,
approved alternative protection shall be utilized. Where
mechanical systems including ducts and dampers utilized
for normal building ventilation serve as part of the smoke
control system, the expected performance of these systems
in smoke control mode shall be addressed in the rational
analysis required by Section 909.4.
716.2.2 Hazardous exhaust ducts. Fire dampers for haz-
ardous exhaust duct systems shall comply with the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.

716.3 Damper testing, ratings and actuation. Damper test-
ing, ratings and actuation shall be in accordance with Sections
716.3.1 through 716.3.3.
716.3.1 Damper testing. Dampers shall be listed and bear
the label of an approved testing agency indicating compli-
ance with the standards in this section. Fire dampers shall
comply with the requirements of UL 555. Only fire dampers
labeled for use in dynamic systems shall be installed in heat-
ing, ventilation and air-conditioning systems designed to
operate with fans on during a fire. Smoke dampers shall
comply with the requirements of UL 555S. Combination
fire/smoke dampers shall comply with the requirements of
both UL 555 and UL 555S. Ceiling radiation dampers shall
comply with the requirements of UL 555C.
716.3.2 Damper rating. Damper ratings shall be in accor-
dance with Sections 716.3.2.1 through 716.3.2.3.
716.3.2.1 Fire damper ratings. Fire dampers shall have
the minimum fire protection rating specified in Table
716.3.2.1 for the type of penetration.
716.3.2.2 Smoke damper ratings. Smoke damper leak-
age ratings shall not be less than Class II. Elevated tem-
perature ratings shall not be less than 250°F (121°C).

TABLE 716.3.2.1
FIRE DAMPER RATING

TYPE OF
PENETRATION

MINIMUM DAMPER RATING
(hours)

Less than 3-hour fire-resistance-rated
assemblies
3-hour or greater fire-resistance-rated
assemblies

1.5

3

716.3.2.3 Combination fire/smoke damper ratings.

Combination fire/smoke dampers shall have the mini-
mum fire protection rating specified for fire dampers in
Table 716.3.2.1 for the type of penetration and shall also
have a minimum Class II leakage rating and a minimum
elevated temperature rating of 250°F (121°C).

716.3.3 Damper actuation. Damper actuation shall be in
accordance with Sections 716.3.3.1 through 716.3.3.4 as
applicable.

716.3.3.1 Fire damper actuation device. The fire
damper actuation device shall meet one of the following
requirements:

1. The operating temperature shall be approximately
50°F (10°C) above the normal temperature within
the duct system, but not less than 160°F (71°C).
2. The operating temperature shall be not more than
350°F (177°C) where located in a smoke control
system complying with Section 909.
716 .3 .3 .2 Smoke damper ac tua t ion . The smoke
damper shall close upon actuation of a listed smoke
detector or detectors installed in accordance with Section
907.3 and one of the following methods, as applicable:

1. Where a smoke damper is installed within a duct, a
smoke detector shall be installed in the duct within
5 feet (1524 mm) of the damper with no air outlets
or inlets between the detector and the damper. The
detector shall be listed for the air velocity, temper-
ature and humidity anticipated at the point where it
is installed. Other than in mechanical smoke con-
trol systems, dampers shall be closed upon fan
shutdown where local smoke detectors require a
minimum velocity to operate.
2. Where a smoke damper is installed above smoke
barrier doors in a smoke barrier, a spot-type
detector listed for releasing service shall be
installed on either side of the smoke barrier door
opening.
3. Where a smoke damper is installed within an air
transfer opening in a wall, a spot-type detector
listed for releasing service shall be installed within
5 feet (1524 mm) horizontally of the damper.
4. Where a smoke damper is installed in a corridor
wall or ceiling, the damper shall be permitted to be

118

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg118.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 9:10:09 AM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

controlled by a smoke detection system installed in
the corridor.
5. Where a total-coverage smoke detector system is
provided within areas served by a heating, ventila-
tion and air-conditioning (HVAC) system, smoke
dampers shall be permitted to be controlled by the
smoke detection system.
716.3.3.3 Combination fire/smoke damper actuation.

Combination fire/smoke damper actuation shall be in
accordance with Sections 716.3.3.1 and 716.3.3.2. Com-
bination fire/smoke dampers installed in smoke control
system shaft penetrations shall not be activated by local
area smoke detection unless it is secondary to the smoke
management system controls.

716.3.3.4 Ceiling radiation damper actuation. The
operating temperature of a ceiling radiation damper
actuation device shall be 50°F (27.8°C) above the normal
temperature within the duct system, but not less than
160°F (71°C).

716.4 Access and identification. Fire and smoke dampers
shall be provided with an approved means of access, which is
large enough to permit inspection and maintenance of the
damper and its operating parts. The access shall not affect the
integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The access open-
ings shall not reduce the fire-resistance rating of the assembly.
Access points shall be permanently identified on the exterior
by a label having letters not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in
height reading: FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER, SMOKE DAMPER
or FIRE DAMPER. Access doors in ducts shall be tight fitting
and suitable for the required duct construction.

716.5 Where required. Fire dampers, smoke dampers and
combination fire/smoke dampers shall be provided at the loca-
tions prescribed in Sections 716.5.1 through 716.5.7 and
716.6. Where an assembly is required to have both fire dampers
and smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers or a fire
damper and a smoke damper shall be required.

716.5.1 Fire walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permit-
ted in fire walls in accordance with Section 706.11 shall be
protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance
with their listing.

716.5.1.1 Horizontal exits. A listed smoke damper
designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided
at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a
fire wall that serves as a horizontal exit.

716.5.2 Fire barriers. Ducts and air transfer openings of
fire barriers shall be protected with approved fire dampers
installed in accordance with their listing. Ducts and air
transfer openings shall not penetrate exit enclosures and exit
passageways except as permitted by Sections 1022.4 and
1023.6, respectively.

Exception: Fire dampers are not required at penetra-
tions of fire barriers where any of the following apply:
1. Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM
E 119 or UL 263 as part of the fire-resistance-rated
assembly.

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2. Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke con-
trol system in accordance with Section 909 and
where the use of a fire damper would interfere with
the operation of a smoke control system.
3. Such walls are penetrated by ducted HVAC sys-
tems, have a required fire-resistance rating of 1
hour or less, are in areas of other than Group H and
are in buildings equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of this
exception, a ducted HVAC system shall be a duct
system for conveying supply, return or exhaust air
as part of the structure’s HVAC system. Such a
duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not
less than No. 26 gage thickness and shall be con-
tinuous from the air-handling appliance or equip-
ment to the air outlet and inlet terminals.
716.5.2.1 Horizontal exits. A listed smoke damper
designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided
at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a
fire barrier that serves as a horizontal exit.
716.5.3 Shaft enclosures. Shaft enclosures that are permit-
ted to be penetrated by ducts and air transfer openings shall
be protected with approved fire and smoke dampers
installed in accordance with their listing.
Exceptions:
1. Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of
shafts where:
1.1. Steel exhaust subducts are extended at
least 22 inches (559 mm) vertically in
exhaust shafts, provided there is a continu-
ous airflow upward to the outside; or
1.2. Penetrations are tested in accordance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 as part of the
fire-resistance-rated assembly; or
1.3. Ducts are used as part of an approved
sm o k e c o n t r o l s y s t em d e s i g n e d a n d
installed in accordance with Section 909
and where the fire damper will interfere
with the operation of the smoke control
system; or
1.4. The penetrations are in parking garage
exhaust or supply shafts that are separated
from other building shafts by not less than
2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.
2. In Group B and R occupancies equipped through-
out with an automatic sprinkler system in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1, smoke dampers are
not required at penetrations of shafts where:
2.1. Kitchen, clothes dryer, bathroom and toilet
room exhaust openings are installed with
steel exhaust subducts, having a minimum
wall thickness of 0.187-inch (0.4712 mm)
(No. 26 gage);
2.2. The subducts extend at least 22 inches (559
mm) vertically; and

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

119

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:09 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2.3. An exhaust fan is installed at the upper ter-
minus of the shaft that is powered continu-
ously in accordance with the provisions of
Section 909.11, so as to maintain a contin-
uous upward airflow to the outside.
3. Smoke dampers are not required at penetration of
exhaust or supply shafts in parking garages that are
separated from other building shafts by not less
than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.
4. Smoke dampers are not required at penetrations of
shafts where ducts are used as part of an approved
mechanical smoke control system designed in
accordance with Section 909 and where the smoke
damper will interfere with the operation of the
smoke control system.
5. Fire dampers and combination fire/smoke damp-
ers are not required in kitchen and clothes dryer
exhaust systems when installed in accordance with
the International Mechanical Code.
716.5.4 Fire partitions. Ducts and air transfer openings
that penetrate fire partitions shall be protected with listed
fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.
Exceptions: In occupancies other than Group H, fire
dampers are not required where any of the following
apply:
1. Corridor walls in buildings equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the duct is
protected as a through penetration in accordance
with Section 713.
2. Tenant partitions in covered mall buildings where
the walls are not required by provisions elsewhere
in the code to extend to the underside of the floor or
roof sheathing, slab or deck above.
3. The duct system is constructed of approved mate-
rials in accordance with the International Mechan-
ical Code and the duct penetrating the wall
complies with all of the following requirements:
3.1. The duct shall not exceed 100 square
inches (0.06 m2).
3.2. The duct shall be constructed of steel a
minimum of 0.0217 inch (0.55 mm) in
thickness.
3.3. The duct shall not have openings that com-
municate the corridor with adjacent spaces
or rooms.
3.4. The duct shall be installed above a ceiling.
3.5. The duct shall not terminate at a wall regis-
ter in the fire-resistance-rated wall.
3.6. A minimum 12-inch-long (305 mm) by
0.060-inch-thick (1.52 mm) steel sleeve
shall be centered in each duct opening. The
sleeve shall be secured to both sides of the
wall and all four sides of the sleeve with
m i n im um 1 1 / 2 - i n c h b y 1 1 / 2 - i n c h b y

0.060-inch (38 mm by 38 mm by 1.52 mm)
steel retaining angles. The retaining angles
shall be secured to the sleeve and the wall
with No. 10 (M5) screws. The annular
space between the steel sleeve and the wall
opening shall be filled with mineral wool
batting on all sides.
716.5.4.1 Corridors. A listed smoke damper designed to
resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each
point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a corridor
enclosure required to have smoke and draft control doors
in accordance with Section 715.4.3.
Exceptions:
1. Smoke dampers are not required where the
bu i ld ing is equ ipped th roughou t w i th an
approved smoke control system in accordance
with Section 909, and smoke dampers are not
necessary for the operation and control of the
system.
2. Smoke dampers are not required in corridor
penetrations where the duct is constructed of
steel not less than 0.019 inch (0.48 mm) in
thickness and there are no openings serving the
corridor.
716.5.5 Smoke barriers. A listed smoke damper designed
to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point
a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a smoke barrier.
Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall
comply with Section 716.3.3.2.
Exception: Smoke dampers are not required where the
openings in ducts are limited to a single smoke compart-
ment and the ducts are constructed of steel.
716.5.6 Exterior walls. Ducts and air transfer openings in
fire-resistance-rated exterior walls required to have pro-
tected openings in accordance with Section 705.10 shall be
protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance
with their listing.
716.5.7 Smoke partitions. A listed smoke damper designed
to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point
that an air transfer opening penetrates a smoke partition.
Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall
comply with Section 716.3.3.2.
Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper
will interfere with the operation of a required smoke con-
trol system in accordance with Section 909, approved
alternative protection shall be utilized.
716.6 Horizontal assemblies. Penetrations by ducts and air
transfer openings of a floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the ceil-
ing membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected by
a shaft enclosure that complies with Section 708 or shall com-
ply with Sections 716.6.1 through 716.6.3.
716.6.1 Through penetrations. In occupancies other than
Groups I-2 and I-3, a duct constructed of approved materials
in accordance with the International Mechanical Code that
penetrates a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assembly
that connects not more than two stories is permitted without

120

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:10 PM

28

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

shaft enclosure protection, provided a listed fire damper is
installed at the floor line or the duct is protected in accor-
dance with Section 713.4. For air transfer openings, see
Exception 7 to Section 708.2.

Exception: A duct is permitted to penetrate three floors
or less without a fire damper at each floor, provided such
duct meets all of the following requirements:

1. The duct shall be contained and located within the
cavity of a wall and shall be constructed of steel
having a minimum wall thickness of 0.187 inches
(0.4712 mm) (No. 26 gage).
2. The duct shall open into only one dwelling or
sleeping unit and the duct system shall be continu-
ous from the unit to the exterior of the building.
3. The duct shall not exceed 4-inch (102 mm) nomi-
nal diameter and the total area of such ducts shall
not exceed 100 square inches (0.065 m2) in any
100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area.
4. The annular space around the duct is protected
with materials that prevent the passage of flame
and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste
where subjected to ASTM E 119 or UL 263
time-temperature conditions under a minimum
positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa)
of water at the location of the penetration for the
time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating
of the construction penetrated.
5. Grille openings located in a ceiling of a fire-resis-
tance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly
shall be protected with a listed ceiling radiation
damper installed in accordance with Section
716.6.2.1.
716.6.2 Membrane penetrations. Ducts and air transfer
openings constructed of approved materials in accordance
with the International Mechanical Code that penetrate the
ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or
roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected with one of the fol-
lowing:

1. A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 708.
2. A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceil-
ing line where a duct penetrates the ceiling of a
fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling
assembly.
3. A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceil-
ing line where a diffuser with no duct attached pene-
t r a t e s t h e c e i l i n g o f a f i r e - r e s i s t a n c e - r a t e d
floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly.

716.6.2.1 Ceiling radiation dampers. Ceiling radiation
dampers shall be tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated
floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly in accordance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Ceiling radiation dampers shall
be installed in accordance with the details listed in the
fire-resistance-rated assembly and the manufacturer’s
installation instructions and the listing. Ceiling radiation

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

dampers are not required where either of the following
applies:
1. Tests in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263
have shown that ceiling radiation dampers are not
necessary in order to maintain the fire-resistance
rating of the assembly.
2. Where exhaust duct penetrations are protected in
accordance with Section 713.4.1.2, are located
within the cavity of a wall and do not pass through
another dwelling unit or tenant space.
716.6.3 Nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies. Duct
systems constructed of approved materials in accordance
with the International Mechanical Code that penetrate
nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies shall be protected
by any of the following methods:
1. A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 708.
2. The duct connects not more than two stories, and the
annular space around the penetrating duct is pro-
tected with an approved noncombustible material that
resists the free passage of flame and the products of
combustion.
3. The duct connects not more than three stories, and the
annular space around the penetrating duct is pro-
tected with an approved noncombustible material that
resists the free passage of flame and the products of
combustion and a fire damper is installed at each floor
line.
Exception: Fire dampers are not required in ducts
within individual residential dwelling units.
716.7 Flexible ducts and air connectors. Flexible ducts and
air connectors shall not pass through any fire-resistance-rated
assembly. Flexible air connectors shall not pass through any
wall, floor or ceiling.

SECTION 717
CONCEALED SPACES

717.1 General. Fireblocking and draftstopping shall be
installed in combustible concealed locations in accordance
with this section. Fireblocking shall comply with Section
717.2. Draftstopping in floor/ceiling spaces and attic spaces
shall comply with Sections 717.3 and 717.4, respectively. The
permitted use of combustible materials in concealed spaces of
buildings of Type I or II construction shall be limited to the
applications indicated in Section 717.5.
717.2 Fireblocking. In combustible construction, fireblocking
shall be installed to cut off concealed draft openings (both ver-
tical and horizontal) and shall form an effective barrier between
f loors , be tween a top s tory and a roof or a ttic space .
Fireblocking shall be installed in the locations specified in Sec-
tions 717.2.2 through 717.2.7.
717.2.1 Fireblocking materials. Fireblocking shall consist
of the following materials:
1. Two-inch (51 mm) nominal lumber.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

121

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:10 PM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

2. Two thicknesses of 1-inch (25 mm) nominal lumber
with broken lap joints.
3. One thickness of 0.719-inch (18.3 mm) wood struc-
tural panels with joints backed by 0.719-inch (18.3
mm) wood structural panels.
4. One thickness of 0.75-inch (19.1 mm) particleboard
w i t h j o i n t s b a c k e d b y 0 . 7 5 - i n c h ( 1 9 m m )
particleboard.
5. One-half-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.
6. One-fourth-inch (6.4 mm) cement-based millboard.
7. Batts or blankets of mineral wool, mineral fiber or
other approved materials installed in such a manner as
to be securely retained in place.
717.2.1.1 Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral
fiber. Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber
or other approved nonrigid materials shall be permitted
for compliance with the 10-foot (3048 mm) horizontal
fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of
studs or staggered studs.
717.2.1.2 Unfaced fiberglass. Unfaced fiberglass batt
insulation used as fireblocking shall fill the entire cross
section of the wall cavity to a minimum height of 16
inches (406 mm) measured vertically. When piping, con-
duit or similar obstructions are encountered, the insula-
tion shall be packed tightly around the obstruction.
717.2.1.3 Loose-fill insulation material. Loose-fill
insulation material, insulating foam sealants and caulk
materials shall not be used as a fireblock unless specifi-
cally tested in the form and manner intended for use to
demonstrate its ability to remain in place and to retard the
spread of fire and hot gases.
717.2.1.4 Fireblocking integrity. The integrity of
fireblocks shall be maintained.
717.2.1.5 Double stud walls. Batts or blankets of min-
eral or glass fiber or other approved nonrigid materials
shall be allowed as fireblocking in walls constructed
using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.
717.2.2 Concealed wall spaces. Fireblocking shall be pro-
vided in concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions,
including furred spaces, and parallel rows of studs or stag-
gered studs, as follows:
1. Vertically at the ceiling and floor levels.
2. Horizontally at intervals not exceeding 10 feet (3048
mm).
717.2.3 Connections between horizontal and vertical
spaces. Fireblocking shall be provided at interconnections
between concealed vertical stud wall or partition spaces and
concealed horizontal spaces created by an assembly of floor
joists or trusses, and between concealed vertical and hori-
zontal spaces such as occur at soffits, drop ceilings, cove
ceilings and similar locations.
717.2.4 Stairways. Fireblocking shall be provided in con-
cealed spaces between stair stringers at the top and bottom

122

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:11 PM

30

of the run. Enclosed spaces under stairs shall also comply
with Section 1009.6.3.

717.2.5 Ceiling and floor openings. Where required by
Exception 6 of Section 708.2, Exception 1 of Section
713.4.1.2 or Section 713.4.2, fireblocking of the annular
space around vents, pipes, ducts, chimneys and fireplaces at
ceilings and floor levels shall be installed with a material
specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use
to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and resist the
free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

717.2.5.1 Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces. Fac-
tory-built chimneys and fireplaces shall be fireblocked in
accordance with UL 103 and UL 127.

717.2.6 Architectural trim. Fireblocking shall be installed
within concealed spaces of exterior wall finish and other
exterior architectural elements where permitted to be of
combustible construction as specified in Section 1406 or
where erected with combustible frames, at maximum inter-
vals of 20 feet (6096 mm), so that there will be no open
space exceeding 100 square feet (9.3 m3). Where wood fur-
ring strips are used, they shall be of approved wood of natu-
ral decay resistance or preservative-treated wood.
If
noncontinuous, such elements shall have closed ends, with
at least 4 inches (102 mm) of separation between sections.

Exceptions:

1. Fireblocking of cornices is not required in sin-
gle-family dwellings. Fireblocking of cornices of a
two-family dwelling is required only at the line of
dwelling unit separation.
2. Fireblocking shall not be required where installed
on noncombustible framing and the face of the
exterior wall finish exposed to the concealed space
is covered by one of the following materials:
2.1. Aluminum having a minimum thickness of
0.019 inch (0.5 mm).
2.2. Corrosion-resistant steel having a base
metal thickness not less than 0.016 inch
(0.4 mm) at any point.
2.3. Other approved noncombustible materi-
als.
717.2.7 Concealed sleeper spaces. Where wood sleepers
are used for laying wood flooring on masonry or concrete
fire-resistance-rated floors, the space between the floor slab
and the underside of the wood flooring shall be filled with an
approved material to resist the free passage of flame and
products of combustion or fireblocked in such a manner that
there will be no open spaces under the flooring that will
exceed 100 square feet (9.3 m2) in area and such space shall
be filled solidly under permanent partitions so that there is
no communication under the flooring between adjoining
rooms.

Exceptions:

1. Fireblocking is not required for slab-on-grade
floors in gymnasiums.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. Fireblocking is required only at the juncture of
each alternate lane and at the ends of each lane in a
bowling facility.
717.3 Draftstopping in floors. In combustible construction,
draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide floor/ceiling
assemblies in the locations prescribed in Sections 717.3.2
through 717.3.3.
717.3.1 Draftstopping materials. Draftstopping materials
shall not be less than1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board,
3/8-inch (9.5 mm) wood structural panel, 3/8-inch (9.5 mm)
particleboard, 1-inch (25-mm) nominal lumber, cement
fiberboard, batts or blankets of mineral wool or glass fiber,
or other approved materials adequately supported. The
integrity of draftstops shall be maintained.
717.3.2 Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4. Draftstopping
shall be provided in floor/ceiling spaces in Group R-1 build-
ings, in Group R-2 buildings with three or more dwelling
units, in Group R-3 buildings with two dwelling units and in
Group R-4 buildings. Draftstopping shall be located above
and in line with the dwelling unit and sleeping unit separa-
tions.
Exceptions:
1. D r a f t s t o p p i n g i s n o t r e q u i r e d i n b u i l d i n g s
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. D r a f t s t o p p i n g i s n o t r e q u i r e d i n b u i l d i n g s
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, pro-
vided that automatic sprinklers are also installed in
the combustible concealed spaces.
717.3.3 Other groups. In other groups, draftstopping shall
be installed so that horizontal floor areas do not exceed
1,000 square feet (93 m2).
Exception: Draftstopping is not required in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
717.4 Draftstopping in attics. In combustible construction,
draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide attic spaces and
concealed roof spaces in the locations prescribed in Sections
717.4.2 and 717.4.3. Ventilation of concealed roof spaces shall
be maintained in accordance with Section 1203.2.
717.4.1 Draftstopping materials. Materials utilized for
draftstopping of attic spaces shall comply with Section
717.3.1.
717.4.1.1 Openings. Openings in the partitions shall be
protected by self-closing doors with automatic latches
constructed as required for the partitions.
717.4.2 Groups R-1 and R-2. Draftstopping shall be pro-
vided in attics, mansards, overhangs or other concealed roof
spaces of Group R-2 buildings with three or more dwelling
units and in all Group R-1 buildings. Draftstopping shall be
installed above, and in line with, sleeping unit and dwelling

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

unit separation walls that do not extend to the underside of
the roof sheathing above.

Exceptions:

1. Where corridor walls provide a sleeping unit or
dwelling unit separation, draftstopping shall only
be required above one of the corridor walls.

2. D r a f t s t o p p i n g i s n o t r e q u i r e d i n b u i l d i n g s
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3. In occupancies in Group R-2 that do not exceed
four stories above grade plane, the attic space
shall be subdivided by draftstops into areas not
exceeding 3,000 square feet (279 m2) or above
every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller.

4. D r a f t s t o p p i n g i s n o t r e q u i r e d i n b u i l d i n g s
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, pro-
vided that automatic sprinklers are also installed in
the combustible concealed spaces.

717.4.3 Other groups. Draftstopping shall be installed in
attics and concealed roof spaces, such that any horizontal
area does not exceed 3,000 square feet (279 m2).

Exception: Draftstopping is not required in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

717.5 Combustible materials in concealed spaces in Type I
or II construction. Combustible materials shall not be permit-
ted in concealed spaces of buildings of Type I or II construc-
tion.

Exceptions:

1. Combustible materials in accordance with Section
603.

2. Combustible materials exposed within plenums com-
plying with Section 602 of the International Mechan-
ical Code.

3. Class A interior finish materials classified in accor-
dance with Section 803.

4. Combustible piping within partitions or shaft enclo-
sures installed in accordance with the provisions of
this code.

5. Combustible piping within concealed ceiling spaces
ins ta l led in acco rdance w i th the In terna t iona l
Mechanical Code and the International Plumbing
Code.

6. Combustible insulation and covering on pipe and tub-
ing, installed in concealed spaces other than plenums,
complying with Section 719.7.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

123

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:12 PM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

SECTION 718
FIRE-RESISTANCE REQUIREMENTS
FOR PLASTER

718.1 Thickness of plaster. The minimum thickness of gyp-
sum plaster or portland cement plaster used in a fire-resis-
tance-rated system shall be determined by the prescribed fire
tests. The plaster thickness shall be measured from the face of
the lath where applied to gypsum lath or metal lath.
718.2 Plaster equivalents. For fire-resistance purposes, 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) of unsanded gypsum plaster shall be deemed
equivalent to 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) of one-to-three gypsum sand
plaster or 1 inch (25 mm) of portland cement sand plaster.
718.3 Noncombustible furring. In buildings of Type I and II
construction, plaster shall be applied directly on concrete or
masonry or on approved noncombustible plastering base and
furring.
718.4 Double reinforcement. Plaster protection more than 1
inch (25 mm) in thickness shall be reinforced with an addi-
tional layer of approved lath embedded at least 3/4 inch (19.1
mm) from the outer surface and fixed securely in place.
Exception: Solid plaster partitions or where otherwise
determined by fire tests.
718.5 Plaster alternatives for concrete. In reinforced con-
crete construction, gypsum plaster or portland cement plaster is
permitted to be substituted for 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the
required poured concrete protection, except that a minimum
thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of poured concrete shall be pro-
vided in reinforced concrete floors and 1 inch (25 mm) in rein-
forced concrete columns in addition to the plaster finish. The
concrete base shall be prepared in accordance with Section
2510.7.

SECTION 719
THERMAL- AND SOUND-INSULATING MATERIALS

719.1 General. Insulating materials, including facings such as
vapor retarders and vapor-permeable membranes, similar cov-
erings and all layers of single and multilayer reflective foil
insulations, shall comply with the requirements of this section.
Where a flame spread index or a smoke-developed index is
specified in this section, such index shall be determined in
accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723. Any material that is
subject to an increase in flame spread index or smoke-devel-
oped index beyond the limits herein established through the
effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions shall
not be permitted.

Exceptions:
1. Fiberboard insulation shall comply with Chapter 23.
2. Foam plastic insulation shall comply with Chapter 26.
3. Duct and pipe insulation and duct and pipe coverings
and linings in plenums shall comply with the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.
4. All layers of single and multilayer reflective plastic
core insulation shall comply with Section 2613.

719.2 Concealed installation. Insulating materials, where
concealed as installed in buildings of any type of construction,
shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a
smoke-developed index of not more than 450.
Exception: Cellulose loose-fill insulation that is not spray
applied, complying with the requirements of Section 719.6,
shall only be required to meet the smoke-developed index of
not more than 450.
719.2.1 Facings. Where such materials are installed in con-
cealed spaces in buildings of Type III, IV or V construction,
the flame spread and smoke-developed limitations do not
apply to facings, coverings, and layers of reflective foil
insulation that are installed behind and in substantial contact
with the unexposed surface of the ceiling, wall or floor fin-
ish.
Exception: All layers of single and multilayer reflective
plastic core insulation shall comply with Section 2613.
719.3 Exposed installation. Insulating materials, where
exposed as installed in buildings of any type of construction,
shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a
smoke-developed index of not more than 450.
Exception: Cellulose loose-fill insulation that is not spray
applied complying with the requirements of Section 719.6
shall only be required to meet the smoke-developed index of
not more than 450.
719.3.1 Attic floors. Exposed insulation materials installed
on attic floors shall have a critical radiant flux of not less
than 0.12 watt per square centimeter when tested in accor-
dance with ASTM E 970.
719.4 Loose-fill insulation. Loose-fill insulation materials
that cannot be mounted in the ASTM E 84 or UL 723 apparatus
without a screen or artificial supports shall comply with the
flame spread and smoke-developed limits of Sections 719.2
and 719.3 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.
Exception: Cellulose loose-fill insulation shall not be
required to be tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2,
provided such insulation complies with the requirements of
Section 719.2 or 719.3, as applicable, and Section 719.6.
719.5 Roof insulation. The use of combustible roof insulation
not complying with Sections 719.2 and 719.3 shall be permit-
ted in any type of construction provided it is covered with
approved roof coverings directly applied thereto.
719.6 Cellulose loose-fill insulation. Cellulose loose-fill insu-
lation shall comply with CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1209 and CPSC
16 CFR, Part 1404. Each package of such insulating material
shall be clearly labeled in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR, Part
1209 and CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1404.
719.7 Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing. Insula-
tion and covering on pipe and tubing shall have a flame spread
index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not
more than 450.
Exception: Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing
installed in plenums shall comply with the International
Mechanical Code.

124

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:12 PM

32

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

SECTION 720
PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE

dons having a reduced cover are assumed to be fully
effective.

720.1 General. The provisions of this section contain prescrip-
tive details of fire-resistance-rated building elements, compo-
nents or assemblies. The materials of construction listed in
Tables 720.1(1), 720.1(2), and 720.1(3) shall be assumed to
have the fire-resistance ratings prescribed therein. Where
materials that change the capacity for heat dissipation are
incorporated into a fire-resistance-rated assembly, fire test
results or other substantiating data shall be made available to
the building official to show that the required fire-resis-
tance-rating time period is not reduced.
720.1.1 Thickness of protective coverings. The thickness
of fire-resistant materials required for protection of struc-
tural members shall be not less than set forth in Table
720.1(1), except as modified in this section. The figures
shown shall be the net thickness of the protecting materials
and shall not include any hollow space in back of the protec-
tion.
720.1.2 Unit masonry protection. Where required, metal
ties shall be embedded in bed joints of unit masonry for pro-
tection of steel columns. Such ties shall be as set forth in
Table 720.1(1) or be equivalent thereto.
720.1.3 Reinforcement for cast-in-place concrete col-
umn protection. Cast-in-place concrete protection for steel
columns shall be reinforced at the edges of such members
with wire ties of not less than 0.18 inch (4.6 mm) in diameter
wound spirally around the columns on a pitch of not more
than 8 inches (203 mm) or by equivalent reinforcement.
720.1.4 Plaster application. The finish coat is not required
for plaster protective coatings where they comply with the
design mix and thickness requirements of Tables 720.1(1),
720.1(2) and 720.1(3).
720.1.5 Bonded prestressed concrete tendons. For mem-
bers having a single tendon or more than one tendon
installed with equal concrete cover measured from the near-
est surface, the cover shall not be less than that set forth in
Table 720.1(1). For members having multiple tendons
installed with variable concrete cover, the average tendon
cover shall not be less than that set forth in Table 720.1(1),
provided:
1. The clearance from each tendon to the nearest
exposed surface is used to determine the average
cover.
2. In no case can the clear cover for individual tendons
be less than one-half of that set forth in Table
720.1(1). A minimum cover of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) for
slabs and 1 inch (25 mm) for beams is required for any
aggregate concrete.
3. For the purpose of establishing a fire-resistance rat-
ing, tendons having a clear covering less than that set
forth in Table 720.1(1) shall not contribute more than
50 percent of the required ultimate moment capacity
for members less than 350 square inches (0.226 m2) in
cross-sectional area and 65 percent for larger mem-
bers. For structural design purposes, however, ten-

SECTION 721
CALCULATED FIRE RESISTANCE

721.1 General. The provisions of this section contain proce-
dures by which the fire resistance of specific materials or com-
binations of materials is established by calculations. These
procedures apply only to the information contained in this sec-
tion and shall not be otherwise used. The calculated fire resis-
tance of concrete, concrete masonry and clay masonry
assemb l ies sha l l be perm i t ted in accordance w i th ACI
216.1/TMS 0216. The calculated fire resistance of steel assem-
blies shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE
29. The calculated fire resistance of exposed wood members
and wood decking shall be permitted in accordance with Chap-
ter 16 of ANSI/AF&PA National Design Specification for
Wood Construction (NDS).
721.1.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall,
for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this
code, have the meanings shown herein.
CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET. A mineral wool insula-
tion material made of alumina-silica fibers and weighing 4
to 10 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (64 to 160 kg/m3).
CONCRETE, CARBONATE AGGREGATE. Concrete
made with aggregates consisting mainly of calcium or mag-
nesium carbonate, such as limestone or dolomite, and con-
taining 40 percent or less quartz, chert or flint.
CONCRETE, CELLULAR. A lightweight
insulating
concrete made by mixing a preformed foam with portland
cement slurry and having a dry unit weight of approxi-
mately 30 pcf (480 kg/m3).
CONCRETE, LIGHTWEIGHT AGGREGATE. Con-
crete made with aggregates of expanded clay, shale, slag or
slate or sintered fly ash or any natural lightweight aggregate
meeting ASTM C 330 and possessing equivalent fire-resis-
tance properties and weighing 85 to 115 pcf (1360 to 1840
kg/m3).
CONCRETE, PERLITE. A lightweight insulating con-
crete having a dry unit weight of approximately 30 pcf (480
kg/m3) made with perlite concrete aggregate. Perlite aggre-
gate is produced from a volcanic rock which, when heated,
expands to form a glass-like material of cellular structure.
CONCRETE, SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT. Concrete made
with a combination of expanded clay, shale, slag, slate,
sintered fly ash, or any natural lightweight aggregate meet-
ing ASTM C 330 and possessing equivalent fire-resistance
properties and natural sand. Its unit weight is generally
between 105 and 120 pcf (1680 and 1920 kg/m3).
CONCRETE, SILICEOUS AGGREGATE. Concrete
made with normal-weight aggregates consisting mainly of
silica or compounds other than calcium or magnesium car-
bonate, which contains more than 40-percent quartz, chert
or flint.

(Section 721.1.1, Definitions, continued on page 146)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

125

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:13 PM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(1)
MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS
FOR VARIOUS NONCOMBUSTIBLE INSULATING MATERIALSm

STRUCTURAL
PARTS TO BE
PROTECTED

ITEM
NUMBER

INSULATING MATERIAL USED

1. Steel columns
and all of primary
trusses

1-1.5

1-1.6

1-3.1

1-1.4

1-1.1 Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 6² ´ 6² or
greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
1-1.2 Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 8² ´ 8² or
greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
1-1.3 Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members
12² ´ 12² or greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members 6² ´ 6²
or greater.a
Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members 8² ´ 8²
or greater.a
Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members
12² ´ 12² or greater.a
1-2.1 Clay or shale brick with brick and mortar fill.a
4² hollow clay tile in two 2² layers; 1/2² mortar between tile and column; 3/8² metal
mesh 0.046² wire diameter in horizontal joints; tile fill.a
2² hollow clay tile; 3/4² mortar between tile and column; 3/8² metal mesh 0.046² wire
diameter in horizontal joints; limestone concrete fill; a plastered with 3/4² gypsum
plaster.
2² hollow clay tile with outside wire ties 0.08² diameter at each course of tile or 3/8²
metal mesh 0.046² diameter wire in horizontal joints; limestone or trap-rock
concrete filla extending 1² outside column on all sides.
2² hollow clay tile with outside wire ties 0.08² diameter at each course of tile with or
without concrete fill; 3/4² mortar between tile and column.
Cement plaster over metal lath wire tied to 3/4² cold-rolled vertical channels with
0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 3² to 6² on center. Plaster mixed
1:2 1/2 by volume, cement to sand.
Vermiculite concrete, 1:4 mix by volume over paperbacked wire fabric lath wrapped
directly around column with additional 2² ´ 2² 0.065²/0.065² (No. 16/16 B.W. gage)
wire fabric placed 3/4² from outer concrete surface. Wire fabric tied with 0.049² (No.
18 B.W. gage) wire spaced 6² on center for inner layer and 2² on center for outer
layer.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over metal lath wrapped around column and
furred 11/4² from column flanges. Sheets lapped at ends and tied at 6² intervals with
0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) tie wire. Plaster pushed through to flanges.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over self-furring metal lath wrapped directly
around column, lapped 1² and tied at 6² intervals with 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage)
wire.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath applied to 3/4² cold-rolled
channels spaced 24² apart vertically and wrapped flatwise around column.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over two layers of 1/2² plain full-length gypsum
lath applied tight to column flanges. Lath wrapped with 1² hexagonal mesh of No.
20 gage wire and tied with doubled 0.035² diameter (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties
spaced 23² on center. For three-coat work, the plaster mix for the second coat shall
not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate for the 3-hour
system.

1-6.2

1-6.3

1-6.4

1-6.1

1-3.2

1-3.3

1-3.4

1-4.1

1-5.1

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
INSULATING MATERIAL
FOR THE FOLLOWING
FIRE-RESISTANCE
PERIODS (inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

21/2

2

11/2

2

11/2

11/2

3

21/2

2

1

2

2

1

1

1

11/2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

33/4 — — 21/4

4 — — —

3 — — —

— — 3 —

— — — 2

— — 21/2

b

7/8

2 — — —

11/2

1 — —

13/4

13/8

1 —

11/2 — — —

21/2

2 — —

(continued)

126

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:13 PM

34

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(1)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS
FOR VARIOUS NONCOMBUSTIBLE INSULATING MATERIALSm

INSULATING MATERIAL USED

Perlite or vermiculate gypsum plaster over one layer of 1/2² plain full-length gypsum
lath applied tight to column flanges. Lath tied with doubled 0.049² (No. 18 B.W.
gage) wire ties spaced 23² on center and scratch coat wrapped with 1² hexagonal
mesh 0.035² (No. 20 B.W. gage) wire fabric. For three-coat work, the plaster mix for
the second coat shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of
aggregate.
Multiple layers of 1/2² gypsum wallboardc adhesivelyd secured to column flanges and
successive layers. Wallboard applied without horizontal joints. Corner edges of each
layer staggered. Wallboard layer below outer layer secured to column with doubled
0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel wire ties spaced 15² on center. Exposed corners
taped and treated.
Three layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard.c First and second layer held in place
by 1/8² diameter by 13/8² long ring shank nails with 5/16² diameter heads spaced 24²
on center at corners. Middle layer also secured with metal straps at mid-height and
18² from each end, and by metal corner bead at each corner held by the metal straps.
Third layer attached to corner bead with 1² long gypsum wallboard screws spaced
12² on center.
Three layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard,c each layer screw attached to 15/8²
steel studs 0.018² thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) at each corner of column.
Middle layer also secured with 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) double-strand steel wire
ties, 24² on center. Screws are No. 6 by 1² spaced 24² on center for inner layer, No.
6 by 15/8² spaced 12² on center for middle layer and No. 8 by 21/4² spaced 12² on
center for outer layer.
Wood-fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight gypsum-to-sand aggregate
applied over metal lath. Lath lapped 1² and tied 6² on center at all end, edges and
spacers with 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel tie wires. Lath applied over 1/2² spacers
made of 3/4² furring channel with 2² legs bent around each corner. Spacers located 1²
from top and bottom of member and a maximum of 40² on center and wire tied with
a single strand of 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel tie wires. Corner bead tied to the
lath at 6² on center along each corner to provide plaster thickness.
Minimum W8x35 wide flange steel column (w/d ³ 0.75) with each web cavity filled
even with the flange tip with normal weight carbonate or siliceous aggregate
concrete (3,000 psi minimum compressive strength with 145 pcf ± 3 pcf unit
weight). Reinforce the concrete in each web cavity with a minimum No. 4 deformed
reinforcing bar installed vertically and centered in the cavity, and secured to the
column web with a minimum No. 2 horizontal deformed reinforcing bar welded to
the web every 18² on center vertically. As an alternative to the No. 4 rebar, 3/4²
diameter by 3² long headed studs, spaced at 12² on center vertically, shall be welded
on each side of the web midway between the column flanges.
Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete (not including
sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel) with 3² or finer metal mesh placed 1² from
the finished surface anchored to the top flange and providing not less than 0.025
square inch of steel area per foot in each direction.
Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 2-1.1 with 3² or finer
metal mesh placed 1² from the finished surface anchored to the top flange and
providing not less than 0.025 square inch of steel area per foot in each direction.
Cement plaster on metal lath attached to 3/4² cold-rolled channels with 0.04² (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 3² to 6² on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 1/2 by volume,
cement to sand.

(continued)

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
INSULATING MATERIAL
FOR THE FOLLOWING
FIRE-RESISTANCE
PERIODS (inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— 2 — —

— — 2

1

— — 17/8 —

— 17/8 — —

— — 15/8 —

— — —

See
Note
n

2

11/2

1

21/2

2

11/2

1

1

— — 21/2

b

7/8

STRUCTURAL
PARTS TO BE
PROTECTED

ITEM
NUMBER

1-6.5

1-7.1

1-7.2

1-7.3

1-8.1

1-9.1

2-1.1

2-1.2

2-2.1

1. Steel columns
and all of
primary trusses
(continued)

2. Webs or
flanges of
steel beams and
girders

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

127

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:14 PM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(1)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS
FOR VARIOUS NONCOMBUSTIBLE INSULATING MATERIALSm

STRUCTURAL
PARTS TO BE
PROTECTED

ITEM
NUMBER

2-3.1

2. Webs or
flanges of steel
beams and
girders
(continued)

3. Bonded
pretensioned
reinforcement in
prestressed
concretee

4. Bonded or
unbonded
post-tensioned
tendons in
prestressed
concretee, i

2-4.1

2-4.2

3-1.1

4-1.1

4-1.2

INSULATING MATERIAL USED

Vermiculite gypsum plaster on a metal lath cage, wire tied to 0.165² diameter (No. 8
B.W. gage) steel wire hangers wrapped around beam and spaced 16² on center.
Metal lath ties spaced approximately 5² on center at cage sides and bottom.
Two layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboardc are attached to U-shaped brackets
spaced 24² on center. 0.018² thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) 15/8² deep by 1²
galvanized steel runner channels are first installed parallel to and on each side of the
top beam flange to provide a 1/2² clearance to the flange. The channel runners are
attached to steel deck or concrete floor construction with approved fasteners spaced
12² on center. U-shaped brackets are formed from members identical to the channel
runners. At the bent portion of the U-shaped bracket, the flanges of the channel are
cut out so that 15/8² deep corner channels can be inserted without attachment parallel
to each side of the lower flange.
As an alternate, 0.021² thick (No. 24 carbon sheet steel gage) 1²´ 2² runner and
corner angles may be used in lieu of channels, and the web cutouts in the U-shaped
brackets may be omitted. Each angle is attached to the bracket with 1/2²-long No. 8
self-drilling screws. The vertical legs of the U-shaped bracket are attached to the
runners with one 1/2² long No. 8 self-drilling screw. The completed steel framing
provides a 21/8² and 11/2² space between the inner layer of wallboard and the sides
and bottom of the steel beam, respectively. The inner layer of wallboard is attached
to the top runners and bottom corner channels or corner angles with 11/4²-long No. 6
self-drilling screws spaced 16² on center. The outer layer of wallboard is applied
with 13/4²-long No. 6 self-drilling screws spaced 8² on center. The bottom corners
are reinforced with metal corner beads.
Three layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboardc attached to a steel suspension system
as described immediately above utilizing the 0.018² thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel
gage) 1² ´ 2² lower corner angles. The framing is located so that a 21/8² and 2² space
is provided between the inner layer of wallboard and the sides and bottom of the
beam, respectively. The first two layers of wallboard are attached as described
immediately above. A layer of 0.035² thick (No. 20 B.W. gage) 1² hexagonal
galvanized wire mesh is applied under the soffit of the middle layer and up the sides
approximately 2². The mesh is held in position with the No. 6 15/8²-long screws
installed in the vertical leg of the bottom corner angles. The outer layer of wallboard
is attached with No. 6 21/4²-long screws spaced 8² on center. One screw is also
installed at the mid-depth of the bracket in each layer. Bottom corners are finished as
described above.
Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceousf aggregate concrete
Beams or girders

Solid slabsh
Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceousf aggregate concrete
Unrestrained members:
Solid slabsh
Beams and girdersj
8² wide
greater than 12² wide
Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceous aggregate
Restrained members:k
Solid slabsh
Beams and girdersj
8² wide
greater than 12² wide

(continued)

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
INSULATING MATERIAL
FOR THE FOLLOWING
FIRE-RESISTANCE
PERIODS (inches)
3
2
hour
hour

1
hour

4
hour

— 7/8 — —

— — 11/4 —

— 17/8 — —

4g

3g

21/2

11/2

2

2

41/2
21/2

1

2
13/4

11/2

1

11/2

21/2
2

3/4

13/4
11/2

—

13/4
11/2

—

—
—

—

3

11/4

21/2
2

128

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:14 PM

36

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(1)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS
FOR VARIOUS NONCOMBUSTIBLE INSULATING MATERIALSm

STRUCTURAL
PARTS TO BE
PROTECTED

ITEM
NUMBER

INSULATING MATERIAL USED

5. Reinforcing
steel in reinforced
concrete columns,
beams girders and
trusses

6. Reinforcing
steel in reinforced
concrete joistsl

7. Reinforcing and
tie rods in floor
and roof slabsl

5-1.1

Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 12² or
larger, square or round. (Size limit does not apply to beams and girders monolithic
with floors.)
Siliceous aggregate concrete, members 12² or larger, square or round. (Size limit
does not apply to beams and girders monolithic with floors.)

6-1.1
6-1.2

Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete.
Siliceous aggregate concrete.

7-1.1
7-1.2

Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete.
Siliceous aggregate concrete.

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
INSULATING MATERIAL
FOR THE FOLLOWING
FIRE-RESISTANCE
PERIODS (inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

11/2

2

11/4
13/4

1
11/4

11/2

11/2

11/4
11/2

1
1

11/2

11/2

11/2

11/2

1
1

3/4

1

3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.2 mm2, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.
a. Reentrant parts of protected members to be filled solidly.
b. Two layers of equal thickness with a 3/4-inch airspace between.
c. For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in Table 720.1(1), gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be
permitted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard and the joints on the face layer are reinforced,
and the entire surface is covered with a minimum of 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.
d. An approved adhesive qualified under ASTM E 119 or UL 263.
e. Where lightweight or sand-lightweight concrete having an oven-dry weight of 110 pounds per cubic foot or less is used, the tabulated minimum cover shall be per-
mitted to be reduced 25 percent, except that in no case shall the cover be less than 3/4 inch in slabs or 11/2 inches in beams or girders.
f. For solid slabs of siliceous aggregate concrete, increase tendon cover 20 percent.
g. Adequate provisions against spalling shall be provided by U-shaped or hooped stirrups spaced not to exceed the depth of the member with a clear cover of 1 inch.
h. Prestressed slabs shall have a thickness not less than that required in Table 720.1(3) for the respective fire-resistance time period.
i. Fire coverage and end anchorages shall be as follows: Cover to the prestressing steel at the anchor shall be 1/2 inch greater than that required away from the anchor.
Minimum cover to steel-bearing plate shall be 1 inch in beams and 3/4 inch in slabs.
j. For beam widths between 8 inches and 12 inches, cover thickness shall be permitted to be determined by interpolation.
k. Interior spans of continuous slabs, beams and girders shall be permitted to be considered restrained.
l. For use with concrete slabs having a comparable fire endurance where members are framed into the structure in such a manner as to provide equivalent perfor-
mance to that of monolithic concrete construction.
m. Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY* in the listing) in GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.
n. No additional insulating material is required on the exposed outside face of the column flange to achieve a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

129

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:15 PM

37

130

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

1. Brick of clay or
shale

1-1.1

Solid brick of clay or shalec.

6

4.9

3.8

2.7

1-1.2 Hollow brick, not filled.
1-1.3 Hollow brick unit wall, grout or filled with perlite vermiculite or expanded shale
aggregate.

5.0

4.3

3.4

2.3

6.6

5.5

4.4

3.0

1-2.1

4² nominal thick units at least 75 percent solid backed with a hat-shaped metal
furring channel 3/4² thick formed from 0.021² sheet metal attached to the brick
wall on 24² centers with approved fasteners, and 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboard
attached to the metal furring strips with 1²-long Type S screws spaced 8² on
center.

— — 5d —

2. Combination of
clay brick and
load-bearing
hollow clay tile

2-1.1

4² solid brick and 4² tile (at least 40 percent solid).

—

8

— —

2-1.2

4² solid brick and 8² tile (at least 40 percent solid).

12 — — —

3. Concrete
masonry units

3-1.1f, g Expanded slag or pumice.

4.7

4.0

3.2

2.1

3-1.2f, g Expanded clay, shale or slate.

5.1

4.4

3.6

2.6

3-1.3f Limestone, cinders or air-cooled slag.

5.9

5.0

4.0

2.7

3-1.4f, g Calcareous or siliceous gravel.

6.2

5.3

4.2

2.8

4. Solid concreteh, i

4-1.1

Siliceous aggregate concrete.

7.0

6.2

5.0

3.5

Carbonate aggregate concrete.

6.6

5.7

4.6

3.2

Sand-lightweight concrete.

5.4

4.6

3.8

2.7

Lightweight concrete.

5.1

4.4

3.6

2.5

5. Glazed or
unglazed facing
tile, nonload-
bearing

5-1.1

One 2² unit cored 15 percent maximum and one 4² unit cored 25 percent
maximum with 3/4² mortar-filled collar joint. Unit positions reversed in alternate
courses.

— 63/8 — —

5-1.2

One 2² unit cored 15 percent maximum and one 4² unit cored 40 percent
maximum with 3/4² mortar-filled collar joint. Unit positions side with 3/4² gypsum
plaster. Two wythes tied together every fourth course with No. 22 gage
corrugated metal ties.

— 63/4 — —

5-1.3 One unit with three cells in wall thickness, cored 29 percent maximum.

— —

6

—

5-1.4

One 2² unit cored 22 percent maximum and one 4² unit cored 41 percent
maximum with 1/4² mortar-filled collar joint. Two wythes tied together every
third course with 0.030² (No. 22 galvanized sheet steel gage) corrugated metal
ties.
5-1.5 One 4² unit cored 25 percent maximum with 3/4² gypsum plaster on one side.
5-1.6 One 4² unit with two cells in wall thickness, cored 22 percent maximum.
5-1.7 One 4² unit cored 30 percent maximum with 3/4² vermiculite gypsum plaster on
one side.
5-1.8 One 4² unit cored 39 percent maximum with 3/4² gypsum plaster on one side.

— —

6

—

— — 43/4 —
— — —
4

— — 41/2 —

— — — 41/2

(continued)

38

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:45 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

6-1.1

6-1.2

6-1.3

6-2.1

6-2.2

6-2.3

7-1.1

8-1.1

6. Solid gypsum
plaster

7. Solid perlite
and portland
cement

8. Solid neat wood
fibered gypsum
plaster

9. Solid wallboard
partition

9-1.1

10. Hollow
(studless) gypsum
wallboard
partition

10-1.1

10-1.2

3/4² by 0.055² (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) vertical cold-rolled channels, 16²
on center with 2.6-pound flat metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049²
(No. 18 B.W. Gage) wire at 6² spacing. Gypsum plaster each side mixed 1:2 by
weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
3/4² by 0.05² (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) cold-rolled channels 16² on center
with metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire
at 6² spacing. Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster each side. For three-coat
work, the plaster mix for the second coat shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum
to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate for the 1-hour system.
3/4² by 0.055² (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) vertical cold-rolled channels, 16²
on center with 3/8² gypsum lath applied to one face and attached with sheet metal
clips. Gypsum plaster each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
Studless with 1/2² full-length plain gypsum lath and gypsum plaster each side.
Plaster mixed 1:1 for scratch coat and 1:2 for brown coat, by weight, gypsum to
sand aggregate.
Studless with 1/2² full-length plain gypsum lath and perlite or vermiculite gypsum
plaster each side.
Studless partition with 3/8² rib metal lath installed vertically adjacent edges tied
6² on center with No. 18 gage wire ties, gypsum plaster each side mixed 1:2 by
weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
Perlite mixed in the ratio of 3 cubic feet to 100 pounds of portland cement and
machine applied to stud side of 11/2² mesh by 0.058-inch (No. 17 B.W. gage)
paper-backed woven wire fabric lath wire-tied to 4²-deep steel trussed wirej studs
16² on center. Wire ties of 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) galvanized steel wire 6² on
center vertically.
3/4² by 0.055-inch (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) cold-rolled channels, 12² on
center with 2.5-pound flat metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049²
(No. 18 B.W. gage) wire at 6² spacing. Neat gypsum plaster applied each side.
One full-length layer 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboarde laminated to each side of 1²
full-length V-edge gypsum coreboard with approved laminating compound.
Vertical joints of face layer and coreboard staggered at least 3².
One full-length layer of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde attached to both sides of
wood or metal top and bottom runners laminated to each side of 1² ´ 6²
full-length gypsum coreboard ribs spaced 2² on center with approved laminating
compound. Ribs centered at vertical joints of face plies and joints staggered 24²
in opposing faces. Ribs may be recessed 6² from the top and bottom.
1² regular gypsum V-edge full-length backing board attached to both sides of
wood or metal top and bottom runners with nails or 15/8² drywall screws at 24²
on center. Minimum width of rumors 15/8². Face layer of 1/2² regular full-length
gypsum wallboard laminated to outer faces of backing board with approved
laminating compound.

(continued)

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS
FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— — — 2d

— — 21/2

d

2d

— — — 2d

— — — 2d

— — 21/2

d

2d

— — — 2d

— — 31/8

d —

— — 2d —

— — 2d —

— — — 21/4

d

— — 45/8

d —

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

131

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:45 AM

39

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

11. Noncombustible
studs—interior
partition with plaster
each side

12. Wood studs
interior partition
with plaster each
side

13.Noncombustible
studs—interior
partition with
gypsum wallboard
each side

ITEM
NUMBER

11-1.1

11-1.2

11-1.3

11-1.4

12-1.1l, m

12-1.2l

12-1.3 l

12-1.4 l

13-1.1

13-1.2

13-1.3

CONSTRUCTION

31/4² ´ 0.044² (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) steel studs spaced 24² on center.
5/8² gypsum plaster on metal lath each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to
sand aggregate.
33/8² ´ 0.055² (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) approved nailablek studs spaced
24² on center. 5/8² neat gypsum wood-fibered plaster each side over 3/8² rib
metal lath nailed to studs with 6d common nails, 8² on center. Nails driven
11/4² and bent over.
4² ´ 0.044² (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped steel studs at 16²
on center. On each side approved resilient clips pressed onto stud flange at 16²
vertical spacing, 1/4² pencil rods snapped into or wire tied onto outer loop of
clips, metal lath wire-tied to pencil rods at 6² intervals, 1² perlite gypsum
plaster, each side.
21/2² ´ 0.044² (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) steel studs spaced 16² on center.
Wood fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight gypsum to sand aggregate
applied on 3/4-pound metal lath wire tied to studs, each side. 3/4² plaster applied
over each face, including finish coat.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with 5/8² gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath
attached by 4d common nails bent over or No. 14 gage by 11/4² by 3/4² crown
width staples spaced 6² on center. Plaster mixed 1:11/2 for scratch coat and 1:3
for brown coat, by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with metal lath and 7/8² neat wood-fibered
gypsum plaster each side. Lath attached by 6d common nails, 7² on center.
Nails driven 11/4² and bent over.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with 3/8² perforated or plain gypsum lath and
1/2² gypsum plaster each side. Lath nailed with 11/8² by No. 13 gage by 19/64²
head plasterboard blued nails, 4² on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight,
gypsum to sand aggregate.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with 3/8² Type X gypsum lath and 1/2² gypsum
plaster each side. Lath nailed with 1 1/8² by No. 13 gage by 19/64² head
plasterboard blued nails, 5² on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to
sand aggregate.
0.018² (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped studs 24² on center
with one full-length layer of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically
attached with 1² long No. 6 drywall screws to each stud. Screws are 8² on
center around the perimeter and 12² on center on the intermediate stud. The
wallboard may be applied horizontally when attached to 35/8² studs and the
horizontal joints are staggered with those on the opposite side. Screws for the
horizontal application shall be 8² on center at vertical edges and 12² on center
at intermediate studs.
0.018² (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped studs 25² on center
with two full-length layers of 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically
each side. First layer attached with 1²-long, No. 6 drywall screws, 8² on center
around the perimeter and 12² on center on the intermediate stud. Second layer
applied with vertical joints offset one stud space from first layer using 15/8²
long, No. 6 drywall screws spaced 9² on center along vertical joints, 12² on
center at intermediate studs and 24² on center along top and bottom runners.
0.055² (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) approved nailable metal studse 24² on
center with full-length 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically and
nailed 7² on center with 6d cement-coated common nails. Approved metal
fastener grips used with nails at vertical butt joints along studs.

(continued)

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— — — 43/4

d

— — 55/8 —

— 75/8

d — —

— — 41/4

d —

— — — 51/8

— — 51/2

d —

— — — 51/4

— — — 51/4

— — — 27/8

d

— — 35/8

d —

— — — 47/8

132

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:46 AM

40

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

14.Wood
studs—interior
partition with
gypsum wallboard
each side

15. Exterior or
interior walls

14-1.1h, m

14-1.2l, m

14-1.3l, m

14-1.4l

14-1.5l, m

14-1.6l

15-1.1l, m

15-1.2l, m

15-1.3l, m

15-1.4

2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with two layers of 3/8² regular gypsum
wallboarde each side, 4d coolern or wallboardn nails at 8² on center first layer, 5d
coolern or wallboardn nails at 8² on center second layer with laminating
compound between layers, joints staggered. First layer applied full length
vertically, second layer applied horizontally or vertically.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with two layers 1/2² regular gypsum wallboarde
applied vertically or horizontally each sidek, joints staggered. Nail base layer
with 5d coolern or wallboardn nails at 8² on center face layer with 8d coolern or
wallboardn nails at 8² on center.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 24² on center with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied
vertically or horizontally nailed with 6d coolern or wallboardn nails at 7² on
center with end joints on nailing members. Stagger joints each side.
2² ´ 4² fire-retardant-treated wood studs spaced 24² on center with one layer of
5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied with face paper grain (long dimension)
parallel to studs. Wallboard attached with 6d coolern or wallboardn nails at 7² on
center.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with two layers 5/8² Type X gypsum
wallboarde each side. Base layers applied vertically and nailed with 6d coolern
or wallboardn nails at 9² on center. Face layer applied vertically or horizontally
and nailed with 8d coolern or wallboardn nails at 7² on center. For nail-adhesive
application, base layers are nailed 6² on center. Face layers applied with coating
of approved wallboard adhesive and nailed 12² on center.
2² ´ 3² fire-retardant-treated wood studs spaced 24² on center with one layer of
5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde applied with face paper grain (long dimension)
at right angles to studs. Wallboard attached with 6d cement-coated box nails
spaced 7² on center.
Exterior surface with 3/4² drop siding over 1/2² gypsum sheathing on 2² ´ 4²
wood studs at 16² on center, interior surface treatment as required for
1-hour-rated exterior or interior 2² ´ 4² wood stud partitions. Gypsum sheathing
nailed with 13/4² by No. 11 gage by 7/16² head galvanized nails at 8² on center.
Siding nailed with 7d galvanized smooth box nails.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with metal lath and 3/4² cement plaster on each
side. Lath attached with 6d common nails 7² on center driven to 1² minimum
penetration and bent over. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and 1:5 for brown
coat, by volume, cement to sand.
2² ´ 4² wood studs 16² on center with 7/8² cement plaster (measured from the
face of studs) on the exterior surface with interior surface treatment as required
for interior wood stud partitions in this table. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and
1:5 for brown coat, by volume, cement to sand.
35/8² No. 16 gage noncombustible studs 16² on center with 7/8² cement plaster
(measured from the face of the studs) on the exterior surface with interior
surface treatment as required for interior, nonbearing, noncombustible stud
partitions in this table. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and 1:5 for brown coat,
by volume, cement to sand.

(continued)

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— — —

5

— — — 51/2

— — — 43/4

— — — 43/4

d

— —

6

—

— — — 35/8

d

— — — Varies

— — — 53/8

— — — Varies

— — — Variesd

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

133

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:46 AM

41

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

4
hour

1
hour

15. Exterior or
interior walls
(continued)

15-1.5m

15-1.6l, m

15-1.7l, m

15-1.8l, m

21/4² ´ 33/4² clay face brick with cored holes over 1/2² gypsum sheathing on
exterior surface of 2² ´ 4² wood studs at 16² on center and two layers 5/8² Type
X gypsum wallboarde on interior surface. Sheathing placed horizontally or
vertically with vertical joints over studs nailed 6² on center with 13/4² ´ No. 11
gage by 7/16² head galvanized nails. Inner layer of wallboard placed horizontally
or vertically and nailed 8² on center with 6d coolern or wallboardn nails. Outer
layer of wallboard placed horizontally or vertically and nailed 8² on center with
8d coolern or wallboardn nails. All joints staggered with vertical joints over
studs. Outer layer joints taped and finished with compound. Nail heads covered
with joint compound. 0.035 inch (No. 20 galvanized sheet gage) corrugated
galvanized steel wall ties 3/4² by 65/8² attached to each stud with two 8d coolern
or wallboardn nails every sixth course of bricks.
2² ´ 6² fire-retardant-treated wood studs 16² on center. Interior face has two
layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum with the base layer placed vertically and attached
with 6d box nails 12² on center. The face layer is placed horizontally and
attached with 8d box nails 8² on center at joints and 12² on center elsewhere.
The exterior face has a base layer of 5/8² Type X gypsum sheathing placed
vertically with 6d box nails 8² on center at joints and 12² on center elsewhere.
An approved building paper is next applied, followed by self-furred exterior lath
attached with 21/2², No. 12 gage galvanized roofing nails with a 3/8² diameter
head and spaced 6² on center along each stud. Cement plaster consisting of a 1/2²
brown coat is then applied. The scratch coat is mixed in the proportion of 1:3 by
weight, cement to sand with 10 pounds of hydrated lime and 3 pounds of
approved additives or admixtures per sack of cement. The brown coat is mixed
in the proportion of 1:4 by weight, cement to sand with the same amounts of
hydrated lime and approved additives or admixtures used in the scratch coat.
2² ´ 6² wood studs 16² on center. The exterior face has a layer of 5/8² Type X
gypsum sheathing placed vertically with 6d box nails 8² on center at joints and
12² on center elsewhere. An approved building paper is next applied, followed
by 1² by No. 18 gage self-furred exterior lath attached with 8d by 21/2² long
galvanized roofing nails spaced 6² on center along each stud. Cement plaster
consisting of a 1/2² scratch coat, a bonding agent and a 1/2² brown coat and a
finish coat is then applied. The scratch coat is mixed in the proportion of 1:3 by
weight, cement to sand with 10 pounds of hydrated lime and 3 pounds of
approved additives or admixtures per sack of cement. The brown coat is mixed
in the proportion of 1:4 by weight, cement to sand with the same amounts of
hydrated lime and approved additives or admixtures used in the scratch coat.
The interior is covered with 3/8² gypsum lath with 1² hexagonal mesh of 0.035
inch (No. 20 B.W. gage) woven wire lath furred out 5/16² and 1² perlite or
vermiculite gypsum plaster. Lath nailed with 11/8² by No. 13 gage by 19/64² head
plasterboard glued nails spaced 5² on center. Mesh attached by 13/4² by No. 12
gage by 3/8² head nails with 3/8² furrings, spaced 8² on center. The plaster mix
shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate.
2² ´ 6² wood studs 16² on center. The exterior face has a layer of 5/8² Type X
gypsum sheathing placed vertically with 6d box nails 8² on center at joints and
12² on center elsewhere. An approved building paper is next applied, followed
by 11/2² by No. 17 gage self-furred exterior lath attached with 8d by 21/2² long
galvanized roofing nails spaced 6² on center along each stud. Cement plaster
consisting of a 1/2² scratch coat, and a 1/2² brown coat is then applied. The
plaster may be placed by machine. The scratch coat is mixed in the proportion of
1:4 by weight, plastic cement to sand. The brown coat is mixed in the proportion
of 1:5 by weight, plastic cement to sand. The interior is covered with 3/8²
gypsum lath with 1² hexagonal mesh of No. 20 gage woven wire lath furred out
5/16² and 1² perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster. Lath nailed with 11/8² by No.
13 gage by 19/64² head plasterboard glued nails spaced 5² on center. Mesh
attached by 13/4² by No. 12 gage by 3/8² head nails with 3/8² furrings, spaced 8²
on center. The plaster mix shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic
feet of aggregate.

(continued)

— — 10 —

— — 81/4 —

— — 83/8 —

— — 83/8 —

134

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:46 AM

42

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

15. Exterior or
interior walls
(continued)

4² No. 18 gage, nonload-bearing metal studs, 16² on center, with 1² portland
cement lime plaster [measured from the back side of the 3/4-pound expanded
metal lath] on the exterior surface. Interior surface to be covered with 1² of
gypsum plaster on 3/4-pound expanded metal lath proportioned by weight—1:2
for scratch coat, 1:3 for brown, gypsum to sand. Lath on one side of the partition
fastened to 1/4² diameter pencil rods supported by No. 20 gage metal clips,
located 16² on center vertically, on each stud. 3² thick mineral fiber insulating
batts friction fitted between the studs.

Steel studs 0.060² thick, 4² deep or 6² at 16² or 24² centers, with 1/2² Glass Fiber
Reinforced Concrete (GFRC) on the exterior surface. GFRC is attached with flex
anchors at 24² on center, with 5² leg welded to studs with two 1/2²-long
flare-bevel welds, and 4² foot attached to the GFRC skin with 5/8² thick GFRC
bonding pads that extend 21/2² beyond the flex anchor foot on both sides. Interior
surface to have two layers of 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboard.e The first layer of
wallboard to be attached with 1²-long Type S buglehead screws spaced 24² on
center and the second layer is attached with 15/8²-long Type S screws spaced at
12² on center. Cavity is to be filled with 5² of 4 pcf (nominal) mineral fiber batts.
GFRC has 11/2² returns packed with mineral fiber and caulked on the exterior.

Steel studs 0.060² thick, 4² deep or 6² at 16² or 24² centers, respectively, with
1/2² Glass Fiber Reinforced Concrete (GFRC) on the exterior surface. GFRC is
attached with flex anchors at 24² on center, with 5² leg welded to studs with two
1/2²-long flare-bevel welds, and 4² foot attached to the GFRC skin with 5/8²-thick
GFRC bonding pads that extend 21/2² beyond the flex anchor foot on both sides.
Interior surface to have one layer of 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboarde, attached
with 11/4²-long Type S buglehead screws spaced 12² on center. Cavity is to be
filled with 5² of 4 pcf (nominal) mineral fiber batts. GFRC has 11/2² returns
packed with mineral fiber and caulked on the exterior.

2² ´ 6² wood studs at 16² with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and
exterior sides covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied
horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over studs, and fastened with 21/4²
Type S drywall screws, spaced 12² on center. Cavity to be filled with 51/2²
mineral wool insulation.

2² ´ 6² wood studs at 16² with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and
exterior sides covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied
vertically with all joints over framing or blocking and fastened with 21/4² Type S
drywall screws, spaced 12² on center. R-19 mineral fiber insulation installed in
stud cavity.

15-1.9

15-1.10

15-1.11

15-1.12q

15-1.13q

15-1.14q

2² ´ 6² wood studs at 16² with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and
exterior sides covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied
horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over studs, and fastened with 21/4²
Type S drywall screws, spaced 7² on center.

15-1.15q

2² ´ 4² wood studs at 16² with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and
exterior sides covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard and sheathing,
respectively, 4¢ wide, applied horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over
studs, and fastened with 21/4² Type S drywall screws, spaced 12² on center.
Cavity to be filled with 31/2² mineral wool insulation.

15-1.16q

2² ´ 6² wood studs at 24² centers with double top plates, single bottom plate;
interior and exterior side covered with two layers of 5/8² Type X gypsum
wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied horizontally with vertical joints over studs. Base layer
fastened with 21/4² Type S drywall screws, spaced 24² on center and face layer
fastened with Type S drywall screws, spaced 8² on center, wallboard joints
covered with paper tape and joint compound, fastener heads covered with joint
compound. Cavity to be filled with 51/2² mineral wool insulation.
(continued)

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4 hour 3 hour 2 hour 1 hour

— — 61/2

d —

— — 61/2 —

— — — 61/8

— — — 63/4

— — — 63/4

— — — 63/4

— — — 43/4

— — 73/4 —

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

135

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:47 AM

43

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4 hour 3 hour 2 hour 1 hour

15. Exterior or
interior walls
(continued)

15-2.1d

15-2.2d

15-2.3d

15-2.4d

16. Exterior walls
rated for fire
resistance from
the inside only in
accordance with
Section 705.5.

16-1.1q

35/8² No. 16 gage steel studs at 24² on center or 2² ´ 4² wood studs at 24² on
center. Metal lath attached to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1² long
No. 6 drywall screws at 6² on center and covered with minimum 3/4² thick
portland cement plaster. Thin veneer brick units of clay or shale complying with
ASTM C 1088, Grade TBS or better, installed in running bond in accordance
with Section 1405.10. Combined total thickness of the portland cement plaster,
mortar and thin veneer brick units shall be not less than 13/4². Interior side
covered with one layer of 5/8² thick Type X gypsum wallboard attached to studs
with 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 12² on center.

35/8² No. 16 gage steel studs at 24² on center or 2² ´ 4² wood studs at 24² on
center. Metal lath attached to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1² long
No. 6 drywall screws at 6² on center and covered with minimum 3/4² thick
portland cement plaster. Thin veneer brick units of clay or shale complying with
ASTM C 1088, Grade TBS or better, installed in running bond in accordance
with Section 1405.10. Combined total thickness of the portland cement plaster,
mortar and thin veneer brick units shall be not less than 2². Interior side covered
with two layers of 5/8² thick Type X gypsum wallboard. Bottom layer attached to
studs with 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 24² on center. Top layer attached to
studs with 15/8² long No. 6 drywall screws at 12² on center.
35/8² No. 16 gage steel studs at 16² on center or 2² ´ 4² wood studs at 16² on
center. Where metal lath is used, attach to the exterior side of studs with
minimum 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 6² on center. Brick units of clay or
shale not less than 25/8² thick complying with ASTM C 216 installed in
accordance with Section 1405.6 with a minimum 1² air space. Interior side
covered with one layer of 5/8² thick Type X gypsum wallboard attached to studs
with 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 12² on center.

35/8² No. 16 gage steel studs at 16² on center or 2² ´ 4² wood studs at 16² on
center. Where metal lath is used, attach to the exterior side of studs with
minimum 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 6² on center. Brick units of clay or
shale not less than 25/8² thick complying with ASTM C 216 installed in
accordance with Section 1405.6 with a minimum 1² air space. Interior side
covered with two layers of 5/8² thick Type X gypsum wallboard. Bottom layer
attached to studs with 1² long No. 6 drywall screws at 24² on center. Top layer
attached to studs with 15/8² long No. 6 drywall screws at 12² on center.

2² ´ 4² wood studs at 16² centers with double top plates, single bottom plate;
interior side covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied
horizontally unblocked, and fastened with 21/4² Type S drywall screws, spaced
12² on center, wallboard joints covered with paper tape and joint compound,
fastener heads covered with joint compound. Exterior covered with 3/8² wood
structural panels, applied vertically, horizontal joints blocked and fastened with
6d common nails (bright) — 12² on center in the field, and 6² on center panel
edges. Cavity to be filled with 31/2² mineral wool insulation. Rating established
for exposure from interior side only.

(continued)

6

77/8

67/8

81/2

— — — 41/2

136

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg136.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 8:25:22 AM

44

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(2)—continued
RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS a, o, p

MATERIAL

ITEM
NUMBER

CONSTRUCTION

16. Exterior walls
rated for fire
resistance from
the inside only in
accordance with
Section 705.5.
(continued)

16-1.2q

16-1.3

2² ´ 6² (51mm x 152 mm) wood studs at 16 ² centers with double top plates, single
bottom plate; interior side covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide,
applied horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over studs and fastened with
21/4² Type S drywall screws, spaced 12² on center, wallboard joints covered with
paper tape and joint compound, fastener heads covered with joint compound, exterior
side covered with 7/16² wood structural panels fastened with 6d common nails (bright)
spaced 12² on center in the field and 6² on center along the panel edges. Cavity to be
filled with 51/2² mineral wool insulation. Rating established from the gypsum-covered
side only.

2² ´ 6² wood studs at 16² centers with double top plates, single bottom plates;
interior side covered with 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard, 4¢ wide, applied
vertically with all joints over framing or blocking and fastened with 21/4² Type S
drywall screws spaced 7² on center. Joints to be covered with tape and joint
compound. Exterior covered with 3/8² wood structural panels, applied vertically
with edges over framing or blocking and fastened with 6d common nails (bright)
at 12² on center in the field and 6² on center on panel edges. R-19 mineral fiber
insulation installed in stud cavity. Rating established from the gypsum-covered
side only.

MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACEb
(inches)

4 hour 3 hour 2 hour 1 hour

— — — 69/16

— — — 61/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.2 mm2, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3.
a. Staples with equivalent holding power and penetration shall be permitted to be used as alternate fasteners to nails for attachment to wood framing.
b. Thickness shown for brick and clay tile is nominal thicknesses unless plastered, in which case thicknesses are net. Thickness shown for concrete masonry and clay
masonry is equivalent thickness defined in Section 721.3.1 for concrete masonry and Section 721.4.1.1 for clay masonry. Where all cells are solid grouted or filled
with silicone-treated perlite loose-fill insulation; vermiculite loose-fill insulation; or expanded clay, shale or slate lightweight aggregate, the equivalent thickness
shall be the thickness of the block or brick using specified dimensions as defined in Chapter 21. Equivalent thickness may also include the thickness of applied plas-
ter and lath or gypsum wallboard, where specified.
c. For units in which the net cross-sectional area of cored brick in any plane parallel to the surface containing the cores is at least 75 percent of the gross cross-sec-
tional area measured in the same plane.
d. Shall be used for nonbearing purposes only.
e. For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in this table, gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be permit-
ted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard, and the joints on the face layer are reinforced and
the entire surface is covered with a minimum of 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.
f. The fire-resistance time period for concrete masonry units meeting the equivalent thicknesses required for a 2-hour fire-resistance rating in Item 3, and having a
thickness of not less than 75/8 inches is 4 hours when cores which are not grouted are filled with silicone-treated perlite loose-fill insulation; vermiculite loose-fill
insulation; or expanded clay, shale or slate lightweight aggregate, sand or slag having a maximum particle size of 3/8 inch.
g. The fire-resistance rating of concrete masonry units composed of a combination of aggregate types or where plaster is applied directly to the concrete masonry
shall be determined in accordance with ACI 216.1/TMS 0216. Lightweight aggregates shall have a maximum combined density of 65 pounds per cubic foot.
h. See also Note b. The equivalent thickness shall be permitted to include the thickness of cement plaster or 1.5 times the thickness of gypsum plaster applied in accor-
dance with the requirements of Chapter 25.
i. Concrete walls shall be reinforced with horizontal and vertical temperature reinforcement as required by Chapter 19.
j. Studs are welded truss wire studs with 0.18 inch (No. 7 B.W. gage) flange wire and 0.18 inch (No. 7 B.W. gage) truss wires.
k. Nailable metal studs consist of two channel studs spot welded back to back with a crimped web forming a nailing groove.
l. Wood structural panels shall be permitted to be installed between the fire protection and the wood studs on either the interior or exterior side of the wood frame
assemblies in this table, provided the length of the fasteners used to attach the fire protection is increased by an amount at least equal to the thickness of the wood
structural panel.
m. The design stress of studs shall be reduced to 78 percent of allowable F¢c with the maximum not greater than 78 percent of the calculated stress with studs having a
slenderness ratio le/d of 33.
n. For properties of cooler or wallboard nails, see ASTM C 514, ASTM C 547 or ASTM F 1667.
o. Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY* in the listing) in the GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.
p. NCMA TEK 5-8A shall be permitted for the design of fire walls.
q. The design stress of studs shall be equal to a maximum of 100 percent of the allowable F¢c calculated in accordance with Section 2306.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

137

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:48 AM

45

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

1. Siliceous
aggregate concrete
2. Carbonate
aggregate concrete
3. Sand-lightweight concrete
4. Lightweight concrete

5. Reinforced
concrete

6. Steel joists constructed with
a poured reinforced concrete
slab on metal lath forms or
steel form unitsd, e

1-1.1

2-1.1

3-1.1
4-1.1

5-1.1

5-2.1

6-1.1

6-2.1

6-3.1

6-4.1

6-5.1

Slab (no ceiling required). Minimum cover over
nonprestressed reinforcement shall not be less than

3/4² b.

Slab with suspended ceiling of vermiculite gypsum
plaster over metal lath attached to 3/4² cold-rolled
channels spaced 12² on center. Ceiling located 6²
minimum below joists.
3/8² Type X gypsum wallboardc attached to 0.018
inch (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) by 7/8² deep by
25/8² hat-shaped galvanized steel channels with
1²-long No. 6 screws. The channels are spaced 24²
on center, span 35² and are supported along their
length at 35² intervals by 0.033² (No. 21 galvanized
sheet gage) galvanized steel flat strap hangers
having formed edges that engage the lips of the
channel. The strap hangers are attached to the side
of the concrete joists with 5/32² by 11/4² long
power-driven fasteners. The wallboard is installed
with the long dimension perpendicular to the
channels. All end joints occur on channels and
supplementary channels are installed parallel to the
main channels, 12² each side, at end joint
occurrences. The finished ceiling is located
approximately 12² below the soffit of the floor slab.
Gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to the bottom
cord with single No. 16 gage or doubled No. 18
gage wire ties spaced 6² on center. Plaster mixed 1:2
for scratch coat, 1:3 for brown coat, by weight,
gypsum-to-sand aggregate for 2-hour system. For
3-hour system plaster is neat.
Vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to
the bottom chord with single No.16 gage or doubled
0.049-inch (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties 6² on center.
Cement plaster over metal lath attached to the
bottom chord of joists with single No. 16 gage or
doubled 0.049² (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties spaced
6² on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat, 1:3
for brown coat for 1-hour system and 1:1 for scratch
coat, 1:1 1/2 for brown coat for 2-hour system, by
weight, cement to sand.
Ceiling of 5/8² Type X wallboardc attached to 7/8²
deep by 25/8² by 0.021 inch (No. 25 carbon sheet
steel gage) hat-shaped furring channels 12² on
center with 1² long No. 6 wallboard screws at 8² on
center. Channels wire tied to bottom chord of joists
with doubled 0.049 inch (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire or
suspended below joists on wire hangers.g
Wood-fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight
gypsum to sand aggregate applied over metal lath.
Lath tied 6² on center to 3/4² channels spaced 131/2²
on center. Channels secured to joists at each
intersection with two strands of 0.049 inch (No. 18
B.W. gage) galvanized wire.

138

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:48 AM

(continued)

46

THICKNESS OF FLOOR
OR ROOF SLAB
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

4
hour

1
hour

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

1
hour

4
hour

7.0

6.2

5.0

3.5 — — — —

6.6

5.7

4.6

3.2 — — — —

5.4
5.1

4.6
4.4

3.8
3.6

2.7 — — — —
2.5 — — — —

3

2 — — 1

3/4 — —

— — 21/2 — — — 5/8 —

— — 21/2 21/4 — — 3/4

5/8

— 2 — — — 5/8 — —

— — — 2 — — — 5/8

f

— — 21/2 — — — 5/8 —

— — 21/2 — — — 3/4 —

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

7-1.1

5/8² gypsum plaster on bottom of floor or roof
construction.

THICKNESS OF FLOOR
OR ROOF SLAB
(inches)

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— — 8h — — — 5/8 —

7. Reinforced concrete slabs
and joists with hollow clay tile
fillers laid end to end in rows
21/2 ² or more apart;
reinforcement placed between
rows and concrete cast around
and over tile.
8. Steel joists constructed with
a reinforced concrete slab on
top poured on a 1/2² deep steel
deck.e

7-1.2 None

— — — 51/2

i — — — —

8-1.1

Vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath attached
to 3/4² cold-rolled channels with 0.049² (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 6² on center.

21/2

j — — — 3/4 — — —

9. 3² deep cellular steel deck
with concrete slab on top. Slab
thickness measured to top.

9-1.1

10. 11/2²-deep steel roof deck
on steel framing. Insulation
board, 30 pcf density,
composed of wood fibers with
cement binders of thickness
shown bonded to deck with
unified asphalt adhesive.
Covered with a Class A or B
roof covering.

10-1.1

11. 11/2²-deep steel roof deck
on steel-framing wood fiber
insulation board, 17.5 pcf
density on top applied over a
15-lb asphalt-saturated felt.
Class A or B roof covering.

11-1.1

Suspended ceiling of vermiculite gypsum plaster
base coat and vermiculite acoustical plaster on metal
lath attached at 6² intervals to 3/4² cold-rolled
channels spaced 12² on center and secured to 11/2²
cold-rolled channels spaced 36² on center with
0.065² (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire. 11/2² channels
supported by No. 8 gage wire hangers at 36² on
center. Beams within envelope and with a 21/2²
airspace between beam soffit and lath have a 4-hour
rating.
Ceiling of gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath
attached to 3/4² furring channels with 0.049² (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 6² on center. 3/4²
channel saddle tied to 2² channels with doubled
0.065² (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire ties. 2² channels
spaced 36² on center suspended 2² below steel
framing and saddle-tied with 0.165² (No. 8 B.W.
gage) wire. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight,
gypsum-to-sand aggregate.
Ceiling of gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath
attached to 3/4² furring channels with 0.049² (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 6² on center. 3/4²
channels saddle tied to 2² channels with doubled
0.065² (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire ties. 2² channels
spaced 36² on center suspended 2² below steel
framing and saddle tied with 0.165² (No. 8 B.W.
gage) wire. Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat and
1:3 for brown coat, by weight, gypsum-to-sand
aggregate for 1-hour system. For 2-hour system,
plaster mix is 1:2 by weight, gypsum-to-sand
aggregate.

(continued)

21/2 — — — 11/8

k — — —

— — 17/8

1 — — 3/4

l

l

3/4

— — 11/2

1 — — 7/8

g

l

3/4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

139

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:48 AM

47

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

THICKNESS OF FLOOR
OR ROOF SLAB
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

4
hour

1
hour

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

1
hour

4
hour

12. 11/2² deep steel roof deck
on steel-framing insulation of
rigid board consisting of
expanded perlite and fibers
impregnated with integral
asphalt waterproofing; density
9 to 12 pcf secured to metal
roof deck by 1/2² wide ribbons
of waterproof, cold-process
liquid adhesive spaced 6²
apart. Steel joist or light steel
construction with metal roof
deck, insulation, and Class A
or B built-up roof covering.e

13. Double wood floor over
wood joists spaced 16² on
center.m,n

14. Plywood stressed skin
panels consisting of 5/8²-thick
interior C-D (exterior glue)
top stressed skin on 2² ´ 6²
nominal (minimum) stringers.
Adjacent panel edges joined
with 8d common wire nails
spaced 6² on center. Stringers
spaced 12² maximum on
center.

12-1.1

Gypsum-vermiculite plaster on metal lath wire tied
at 6² intervals to 3/4² furring channels spaced 12² on
center and wire tied to 2² runner channels spaced
32² on center. Runners wire tied to bottom chord of
steel joists.

— — 1 — — — 7/8 —

13-1.1

13-1.2

13-1.3

13-1.4

14-1.1

Gypsum plaster over 3/8² Type X gypsum lath. Lath
initially applied with not less than four 11/8² by No.
13 gage by 19/64² head plasterboard blued nails per
bearing. Continuous stripping over lath along all
joist lines. Stripping consists of 3² wide strips of
metal lath attached by 11/2² by No. 11 gage by 1/2²
head roofing nails spaced 6² on center. Alternate
stripping consists of 3² wide 0.049² diameter wire
stripping weighing 1 pound per square yard and
attached by No.16 gage by 11/2² by 3/4² crown width
staples, spaced 4² on center. Where alternate
stripping is used, the lath nailing may consist of two
nails at each end and one nail at each intermediate
bearing. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight,
gypsum-to-sand aggregate.
Cement or gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath
fastened with 11/2² by No. 11 gage by 7/16² head
barbed shank roofing nails spaced 5² on center.
Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat and 1:3 for brown
coat, by weight, cement to sand aggregate.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath
secured to joists with 11/2² by No. 11 gage by 7/16²
head barbed shank roofing nails spaced 5² on center.
1/2² Type X gypsum wallboardc nailed to joists with
5d coolero or wallboardo nails at 6² on center. End
joints of wallboard centered on joists.
1/2²-thick wood fiberboard weighing 15 to 18
pounds per cubic foot installed with long dimension
parallel to stringers or 3/8² C-D (exterior glue)
plywood glued and/or nailed to stringers. Nailing to
be with 5d coolero or wallboardo nails at 12² on
center. Second layer of 1/2² Type X gypsum
wallboardc applied with long dimension
perpendicular to joists and attached with 8d coolero
or wallboardo nails at 6² on center at end joints and
8² on center elsewhere. Wallboard joints staggered
with respect to fiberboard joints.

(continued)

— — — — — — — 7/8

— — — — — — — 5/8

— — — — — — — 5/8

— — — — — — — 1/2

— — — — — — — 1

140

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:49 AM

48

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

THICKNESS OF FLOOR
OR ROOF SLAB
(inches)

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

15. Vermiculite concrete slab
proportioned 1:4 (portland
cement to vermiculite
aggregate) on a 11/2²-deep
steel deck supported on
individually protected steel
framing. Maximum span of
deck 6¢-10² where deck is less
than 0.019 inch (No. 26
carbon steel sheet gage) or
greater. Slab reinforced with
4² ´ 8² 0.109/0.083² (No. 12/14
B.W. gage) welded wire mesh.
16. Perlite concrete slab
proportioned 1:6 (portland
cement to perlite aggregate)
on a 11/4²-deep steel deck
supported on individually
protected steel framing. Slab
reinforced with 4² ´ 8²
0.109/0.083² (No. 12/14 B.W.
gage) welded wire mesh.
17. Perlite concrete slab
proportioned 1:6 (portland
cement to perlite aggregate)
on a 9/16²-deep steel deck
supported by steel joists 4¢ on
center. Class A or B roof
covering on top.
18. Perlite concrete slab
proportioned 1:6 (portland
cement to perlite aggregate)
on 11/4²-deep steel deck
supported on individually
protected steel framing.
Maximum span of deck 6¢-10²
where deck is less than 0.019²
(No. 26 carbon sheet steel
gage) and 8¢-0² where deck is
0.019² (No. 26 carbon sheet
steel gage) or greater. Slab
reinforced with 0.042² (No. 19
B.W. gage) hexagonal wire
mesh. Class A or B roof
covering on top.

15-1.1 None

— — — 3j — — — —

16-1.1 None

— — — 31/2

j — — — —

17-1.1

Perlite gypsum plaster on metal lath wire tied to 3/4²
furring channels attached with 0.065² (No. 16 B.W.
gage) wire ties to lower chord of joists.

— 2p

2p — — 7/8

3/4 —

18-1.1 None

— 21/4

p 21/4

p — — — — —

(continued)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

141

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:49 AM

49

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

4 hour 3 hour 2 hour 1 hour 4 hour 3 hour 2 hour 1 hour

THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR
ROOF SLAB
(inches)

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)

19-1.1

Suspended envelope ceiling of perlite
gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to
3/4² cold-rolled channels, secured to 11/2²
cold-rolled channels spaced 42² on center
supported by 0.203 inch (No. 6 B.W. gage)
wire 36² on center. Beams in envelope with
3² minimum airspace between beam soffit
and lath have a 4-hour rating.

2p —

—

—

1l

— — —

20-1.1 None

— — Varies — — — — —

19. Floor and beam
construction consisting of
3²-deep cellular steel floor
unit mounted on steel
members with 1:4
(proportion of portland
cement to perlite
aggregate) perlite-concrete
floor slab on top.
20. Perlite concrete
proportioned 1:6 (portland
cement to perlite
aggregate) poured to 1/8²
thickness above top of
corrugations of 15/16²-deep
galvanized steel deck
maximum span 8¢-0² for
0.024² (No. 24 galvanized
sheet gage) or 6¢ 0² for
0.019² (No. 26 galvanized
sheet gage) with deck
supported by individually
protected steel framing.
Approved polystyrene
foam plastic insulation
board having a flame
spread not exceeding 75
(1² to 4² thickness) with
vent holes that
approximate 3 percent of
the board surface area
placed on top of perlite
slurry. A 2¢ by 4¢ insulation
board contains six 23/4²
diameter holes. Board
covered with 21/4²
minimum perlite concrete
slab.

(continued)

142

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:49 AM

50

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR
ROOF SLAB
(inches)
2
hour

3
hour

1
hour

4
hour

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

4
hour

1
hour

(continued)
20. Slab reinforced with mesh
consisting of 0.042² (No. 19
B.W. gage) galvanized steel
wire twisted together to form
2² hexagons with straight
0.065² (No. 16 B.W. gage)
galvanized steel wire woven
into mesh and spaced 3².
Alternate slab reinforcement
shall be permitted to consist of
4² ´ 8², 0.109/0.238² (No. 12/4
B.W. gage), or 2² ´ 2²,
0.083/0.083² (No. 14/14 B.W.
gage) welded wire fabric. Class
A or B roof covering on top.
21. Wood joists, wood I-joists,
floor trusses and flat or pitched
roof trusses spaced a maximum
24² o.c. with 1/2² wood
structural panels with exterior
glue applied at right angles to
top of joist or top chord of
trusses with 8d nails. The wood
structural panel thickness shall
not be less than nominal 1/2²
nor less than required by
Chapter 23.
22. Steel joists, floor trusses
and flat or pitched roof trusses
spaced a maximum 24² o.c.
with 1/2² wood structural panels
with exterior glue applied at
right angles to top of joist or
top chord of trusses with No. 8
screws. The wood structural
panel thickness shall not be less
than nominal 1/2² nor less than
required by Chapter 23.
23. Wood I-joist (minimum
joist depth 91/4² with a
minimum flange depth of 15/16²
and a minimum flange cross-
sectional area of 2.3 square
inches) at 24² o.c. spacing with
1 inch by 4 inch (nominal)
wood furring strip spacer
applied parallel to and covering
the bottom of the bottom flange
of each member, tacked in
place. 2² mineral wool
insulation, 3.5 pcf (nominal)
installed adjacent to the bottom
flange of the I-joist and
supported by the 1² ´ 4²
furring strip spacer.

20-1.1 None

— — Varies — — — — —

21-1.1

22-1.1

Base layer 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard applied
at right angles to joist or truss 24² o.c. with 11/4²
Type S or Type W drywall screws 24² o.c. Face
layer 5/8² Type X gypsum wallboard or veneer
base applied at right angles to joist or truss
through base layer with 17/8² Type S or Type W
drywall screws 12² o.c. at joints and intermediate
joist or truss. Face layer Type G drywall screws
placed 2² back on either side of face layer end
joints, 12² o.c.

Base layer 5/8² Type X gypsum board applied at
right angles to steel framing 24² on center with 1²
Type S drywall screws spaced 24² on center. Face
layer 5/8² Type X gypsum board applied at right
angles to steel framing attached through base
layer with 15/8² Type S drywall screws 12² on
center at end joints and intermediate joints and
11/2² Type G drywall screws 12 inches on center
placed 2² back on either side of face layer end
joints. Joints of the face layer are offset 24² from
the joints of the base layer.

23-1.1

1/2² deep single leg resilient channel 16² on center
(channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed
perpendicular to the furring strip and joist and
attached to each joist by 17/8² Type S drywall
screws. 5/8² Type C gypsum wallboard applied
perpendicular to the channel with end joints
staggered at least 4¢ and fastened with 11/8² Type
S drywall screws spaced 7² on center. Wallboard
joints to be taped and covered with joint
compound.

(continued)

— — — Varies — — — 11/4

— — — Varies — — — 11/4

— — — Varies — — — 5/8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

143

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:49 AM

51

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR
ROOF SLAB
(inches)

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

4
hour

3
hour

2
hour

1
hour

— — — Varies — — — 5/8

— — — Varies — — — 5/8

— — — Varies — — — 1

— — — Varies — — — 1

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

24. Wood I-joist (minimum
I-joist depth 91/4² with a
minimum flange depth of 11/2²
and a minimum flange
cross-sectional area of 5.25
square inches; minimum web
thickness of 3/8²) @ 24² o.c.,
11/2² mineral wool insulation
(2.5 pcf—nominal) resting on
hat-shaped furring channels.

25. Wood I-joist (minimum
I-joist depth 91/4² with a
minimum flange depth of 11/2²
and a minimum flange
cross-sectional area of 5.25
square inches; minimum web
thickness of 7/16²) @ 24² o.c.,
11/2² mineral wool insulation
(2.5 pcf—nominal) resting on
resilient channels.

24-1.1

25-1.1

26. Wood I-joist (minimum
I-joist depth 91/4² with a
minimum flange thickness of
11/2² and a minimum flange
cross-sectional area of 2.25
square inches; minimum web
thickness of 3/8²) @ 24² o.c.

26-1.1

27. Wood I-joist (minimum
I-joist depth 91/2² with a
minimum flange depth of
115/16² and a minimum flange
cross-sectional area of 1.95
square inches; minimum web
thickness of 3/8²) @ 24² o.c.

27-1.1

Minimum 0.026² thick hat-shaped channel 16²
o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard end joints),
placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to
each joist by 15/8² Type S drywall screws. 5/8²
Type C gypsum wallboard applied
perpendicular to the channel with end joints
staggered and fastened with 11/8² Type S
drywall screws spaced 12² o.c. in the field and
8² o.c. at the wallboard ends. Wallboard joints
to be taped and covered with joint compound.

Minimum 0.019² thick resilient channel 16² o.c.
(channels doubled at wallboard end joints),
placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to
each joist by 15/8² Type S drywall screws. 5/8²
Type C gypsum wallboard applied
perpendicular to the channel with end joints
staggered and fastened with 1² Type S drywall
screws spaced 12² o.c. in the field and 8² o.c. at
the wallboard ends. Wallboard joints to be taped
and covered with joint compound.

Two layers of 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboard
applied with the long dimension perpendicular
to the I-joists with end joints staggered. The
base layer is fastened with 15/8² Type S drywall
screws spaced 12² o.c. and the face layer is
fastened with 2² Type S drywall screws spaced
12² o.c. in the field and 8² o.c. on the edges.
Face layer end joints shall not occur on the same
I-joist as base layer end joints and edge joints
shall be offset 24² from base layer joints. Face
layer to also be attached to base layer with 11/2²
Type G drywall screws spaced 8² o.c. placed 6²
from face layer end joints. Face layer wallboard
joints to be taped and covered with joint
compound.

Minimum 0.019² thick resilient channel 16² o.c.
(channels doubled at wallboard end joints),
placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to
each joist by 15/8² Type S drywall screws. Two
layers of 1/2² Type X gypsum wallboard applied
with the long dimension perpendicular to the
I-joists with end joints staggered. The base layer
is fastened with 11/4² Type S drywall screws
spaced 12² o.c. and the face layer is fastened
with 15/8² Type S drywall screws spaced 12²
o.c. Face layer end joints shall not occur on the
same I-joist as base layer end joints and edge
joints shall be offset 24² from base layer joints.
Face layer to also be attached to base layer with
11/2² Type G drywall screws spaced 8² o.c.
placed 6² from face layer end joints. Face layer
wallboard joints to be taped and covered with
joint compound.

(continued)

144

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:50 AM

52

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 720.1(3)—continued
MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR
ROOF SLAB
(inches)
2
hour

3
hour

1
hour

4
hour

MINIMUM THICKNESS
OF CEILING
(inches)
3
2
hour
hour

1
hour

4
hour

— — — Varies — — 23/4 —

— — Varies — — — 33/8 —

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION

ITEM
NUMBER

28. Wood I-joist (minimum
I-joist depth 91/4² with a
minimum flange depth of
11/2² and a minimum flange
cross-sectional area of 2.25
square inches; minimum web
thickness of 3/8²) @ 24² o.c.
Unfaced fiberglass insulation
is installed between the
I-joists supported on the
upper surface of the flange by
stay wires spaced 12² o.c.

28-1.1

29. Channel-shaped 18 gage
steel joists (minimum depth
8²) spaced a maximum 24²
o.c. supporting
tongue-and-groove wood
structural panels (nominal
minimum 3/4² thick) applied
perpendicular to framing
members. Structural panels
attached with 1-5/8² Type
S-12 screws spaced 12² o.c.

29-1.1

CEILING CONSTRUCTION

Base layer of 5/8² Type C gypsum wallboard
attached directly to I-joists with 15/8² Type S
drywall screws spaced 12² o.c. with ends
staggered. Minimum 0.0179² thick hat-shaped
7/8-inch furring channel 16² o.c. (channels
doubled at wallboard end joints), placed
perpendicular to the joist and attached to each
joist by 15/8² Type S drywall screws after the
base layer of gypsum wallboard has been
applied. The middle and face layers of 5/8² Type
C gypsum wallboard applied perpendicular to
the channel with end joints staggered. The
middle layer is fastened with 1² Type S drywall
screws spaced 12² o.c. The face layer is applied
parallel to the middle layer but with the edge
joints offset 24² from those of the middle layer
and fastened with 15/8² Type S drywall screws
8² o.c. The joints shall be taped and covered
with joint compound.
Base layer 5/8² Type X gypsum board applied
perpendicular to bottom of framing members
with 11/8² Type S-12 screws spaced 12² o.c.
Second layer 5/8² Type X gypsum board
attached perpendicular to framing members with
15/8² Type S-12 screws spaced 12² o.c. Second
layer joints offset 24² from base layer. Third
layer 5/8² Type X gypsum board attached
perpendicular to framing members with 23/8²
Type S-12 screws spaced 12² o.c. Third layer
joints offset 12² from second layer joints.
Hat-shaped 7/8-inch rigid furring channels
applied at right angles to framing members over
third layer with two 23/8² Type S-12 screws at
each framing member. Face layer 5/8² Type X
gypsum board applied at right angles to furring
channels with 11/8² Type S screws spaced 12²
o.c.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

145

07_ibc_2009pg130-145.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:35:50 AM

53

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

Table 720.1(3) Notes.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283m3,
1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 pound per lineal foot = 1.4882 kg/m.
a. Staples with equivalent holding power and penetration shall be permitted to be used as alternate fasteners to nails for attachment to wood framing.
b. When the slab is in an unrestrained condition, minimum reinforcement cover shall not be less than 15/8 inches for 4-hour (siliceous aggregate only); 11/4 inches for
4- and 3-hour; 1 inch for 2-hour (siliceous aggregate only); and 3/4 inch for all other restrained and unrestrained conditions.
c. For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in this table, gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be permit-
ted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard, and the joints on the face layer are reinforced and
the entire surface is covered with a minimum of 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.
d. Slab thickness over steel joists measured at the joists for metal lath form and at the top of the form for steel form units.
e. (a) The maximum allowable stress level for H-Series joists shall not exceed 22,000 psi.
(b) The allowable stress for K-Series joists shall not exceed 26,000 psi, the nominal depth of such joist shall not be less than 10 inches and the nominal joist weight
shall not be less than 5 pounds per lineal foot.
f. Cement plaster with 15 pounds of hydrated lime and 3 pounds of approved additives or admixtures per bag of cement.
g. Gypsum wallboard ceilings attached to steel framing shall be permitted to be suspended with 11/2-inch cold-formed carrying channels spaced 48 inches on center,
which are suspended with No. 8 SWG galvanized wire hangers spaced 48 inches on center. Cross-furring channels are tied to the carrying channels with No. 18
SWG galvanized wire hangers spaced 48 inches on center. Cross-furring channels are tied to the carrying channels with No. 18 SWG galvanized wire (double
strand) and spaced as required for direct attachment to the framing. This alternative is also applicable to those steel framing assemblies recognized under
Note q.
h. Six-inch hollow clay tile with 2-inch concrete slab above.
i. Four-inch hollow clay tile with 11/2-inch concrete slab above.
j. Thickness measured to bottom of steel form units.
k. Five-eighths inch of vermiculite gypsum plaster plus 1/2 inch of approved vermiculite acoustical plastic.
l. Furring channels spaced 12 inches on center.
m. Double wood floor shall be permitted to be either of the following:
(a) Subfloor of 1-inch nominal boarding, a layer of asbestos paper weighing not less than 14 pounds per 100 square feet and a layer of 1-inch nominal
tongue-and-groove finished flooring; or
(b) Subfloor of 1-inch nominal tongue-and-groove boarding or 15/32-inch wood structural panels with exterior glue and a layer of 1-inch nominal
tongue-and-groove finished flooring or 19/32-inch wood structural panel finish flooring or a layer of Type I Grade M-1 particleboard not less than 5/8-inch thick.
n. The ceiling shall be permitted to be omitted over unusable space, and flooring shall be permitted to be omitted where unusable space occurs above.
o. For properties of cooler or wallboard nails, see ASTM C 514, ASTM C 547 or ASTM F 1667.
p. Thickness measured on top of steel deck unit.
q. Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY* in the listing) in the GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.

(Section 721.1.1 continued from page 125)

CONCRETE, VERMICULITE. A lightweight insulating
concrete made with vermiculite concrete aggregate which is
laminated micaceous material produced by expanding the
ore at high temperatures. When added to a portland cement
slurry the resulting concrete has a dry unit weight of approx-
imately 30 pcf (480 kg/m3).
GLASS FIBERBOARD. Fibrous glass roof insulation
consisting of inorganic glass fibers formed into rigid boards
using a binder. The board has a top surface faced with
asphalt and kraft reinforced with glass fiber.
MINERAL BOARD. A rigid felted thermal insulation
board consisting of either felted mineral fiber or cellular
beads of expanded aggregate formed into flat rectangular
units.
721.2 Concrete assemblies. The provisions of this section
contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of con-
crete assemblies are established by calculations.
721.2.1 Concrete walls. Cast-in-place and precast concrete
walls shall comply with Section 721.2.1.1. Multiwythe con-
crete walls shall comply with Section 721.2.1.2. Joints
between precast panels
shall comply with Section
721.2.1.3. Concrete walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster
finish shall comply with Section 721.2.1.4.
721.2.1.1 Cast-in-place or precast walls. The mini-
mum equivalent thicknesses of cast-in-place or precast
concrete walls for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4
hours are shown in Table 721.2.1.1. For solid walls with

146

flat vertical surfaces, the equivalent thickness is the same
as the actual thickness. The values in Table 721.2.1.1
apply to plain, reinforced or prestressed concrete walls.

TABLE 721.2.1.1
MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS OF CAST-IN-PLACE OR
PRECAST CONCRETE WALLS, LOAD-BEARING OR
NONLOAD-BEARING

CONCRETE
TYPE

Siliceous

Carbonate

Sand-Lightweight

Lightweight

MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (inches)
FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF

1-hour

11/2-hour

2-hour

3-hour

4-hour

3.5

3.2

2.7

2.5

4.3

4.0

3.3

3.1

5.0

4.6

3.8

3.6

6.2

5.7

4.6

4.4

7.0

6.6

5.4

5.1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

721.2.1.1.1 Hollow-core precast wall panels. For
hollow-core precast concrete wall panels in which the
cores are of constant cross section throughout the
length, calculation of the equivalent thickness by
dividing the net cross-sectional area (the gross cross
section minus the area of the cores) of the panel by its
width shall be permitted.

721.2.1.1.2 Core spaces filled. Where all of the core
spaces of hollow-core wall panels are filled with
loose-fill material, such as expanded shale, clay, or
slag, or vermiculite or perlite, the fire-resistance rat-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:22 PM

54

ing of the wall is the same as that of a solid wall of the
same concrete type and of the same overall thickness.
721.2.1.1.3 Tapered cross sections. The thickness of
panels with tapered cross sections shall be that deter-
mined at a distance 2t or 6 inches (152 mm), which-
ever is less, from the point of minimum thickness,
where t is the minimum thickness.
721.2.1.1.4 Ribbed or undulating surfaces. The
equivalent thickness of panels with ribbed or undulat-
ing surfaces shall be determined by one of the follow-
ing expressions:

For s ³ 4t, the thickness to be used shall be t
For s £ 2t, the thickness to be used shall be te
For 4t > s > 2t, the thickness to be used shall be

t

4
t
s

t

e

t

+

-

æ
ç

ç
ç
è

ö
÷

÷
÷
ø

-

æ
ç

ç
è

ç

ö
÷

÷
ø

÷

1

(Equation 7-3)

where:
s
= Spacing of ribs or undulations.
t
= Minimum thickness.
te
= Equivalent thickness of the panel calculated
as the net cross-sectional area of the panel di-
vided by the width, in which the maximum
thickness used in the calculation shall not ex-
ceed 2t.
721.2.1.2 Multiwythe walls. For walls that consist of
two wythes of different types of concrete, the fire-resis-
tance ratings shall be permitted to be determined from
Figure 721.2.1.2.

721.2.1.2.1 Two or more wythes. The fire-resistance
rating for wall panels consisting of two or more wythes
shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

R = (R1
where:
R = The fire endurance of the assembly, minutes.
R1, R2, and Rn = The fire endurances of the individual
wythes, minutes.Values of Rn
0.59 for use in Equation 7-4
are given in Table 721.2.1.2(1). Calculated fire-resis-
tance ratings are shown in Table 721.2.1.2(2).

0.59 + R2

0.59 + ... + Rn

0.59)1.7

(Equation 7-4)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

147

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.1.2
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS OF
TWO-WYTHE CONCRETE WALLS

TABLE 721.2.1.2(1)
VALUES OF Rn
0.59 FOR USE IN EQUATION 7-4

TYPE OF MATERIAL

THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (inches)

11/2

2

21/2

3

31/2

4

41/2

5

51/2

6

61/2

7

Siliceous aggregate
concrete

5.3

6.5

8.1

9.5

11.3

13.0

14.9

16.9

18.8

20.7

22.8

25.1

Carbonate aggregate
concrete

5.5

7.1

8.9

10.4

12.0

14.0

16.2

18.1

20.3

21.9

24.7

27.2c

Sand-lightweight
concrete

6.5

8.2

10.5

12.8

15.5

18.1

20.7

23.3

26.0c

Note c Note c Note c

Lightweight concrete

6.6

8.8

11.2

13.7

16.5

19.1

21.9

24.7

27.8c

Note c Note c Note c

Insulating concretea

9.3

13.3

16.6

18.3

23.1

26.5c

Note c Note c Note c Note c Note c Note c

Airspaceb

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

¾

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.
a. Dry unit weight of 35 pcf or less and consisting of cellular, perlite or vermiculite concrete.
b. The Rn
0.59 value for one 1/2² to 3 1/2² airspace is 3.3. The Rn
0.59 value for two 1/2² to 3 1/2² airspaces is 6.7.
c. The fire-resistance rating for this thickness exceeds 4 hours.

55

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:23 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.2.1.2(2)
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS BASED ON RO.59

R a, MINUTES

60
120
180
240

a. Based on Equation 7-4.

R 0.59

11.20
16.85
21.41
25.37

721.2.1.2.2 Foam plastic insulation. The fire-resis-
tance ratings of precast concrete wall panels consist-
ing of a layer of foam plastic insulation sandwiched
between two wythes of concrete shall be permitted to
be determined by use of Equation 7-4. Foam plastic
insulation with a total thickness of less than 1 inch (25
mm) shall be disregarded. The Rn value for thickness
of foam plastic insulation of 1 inch (25 mm) or
greater, for use in the calculation, is 5 minutes; there-
fore Rn
0.59 = 2.5.
721.2.1.3 Joints between precast wall panels. Joints
between precast concrete wall panels which are not insu-
lated as required by this section shall be considered as
openings in walls. Uninsulated joints shall be included in
determining the percentage of openings permitted by
Table 705.8. Where openings are not permitted or are
required by this code to be protected, the provisions of
this section shall be used to determine the amount of joint
insulation required. Insulated joints shall not be consid-
ered openings for purposes of determining compliance
with the allowable percentage of openings in Table
705.8.
721.2.1.3.1 Ceramic fiber joint protection. Figure
721.2.1.3.1 shows thicknesses of ceramic fiber blan-
kets to be used to insulate joints between precast con-
crete wall panels for various panel thicknesses and for
joint widths of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) and 1 inch (25 mm)

for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours. For
joint widths between 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) and 1 inch (25
mm), the thickness of ceramic fiber blanket is allowed
to be determined by direct interpolation. Other tested
and labeled materials are acceptable in place of
ceramic fiber blankets.
721.2.1.4 Walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster fin-
ishes. The fire-resistance rating of cast-in-place or pre-
cast concrete walls with finishes of gypsum wallboard or
plaster applied to one or both sides shall be permitted to
be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
721.2.1.4.1 Nonfire-exposed side. Where the finish
of gypsum wallboard or plaster is applied to the side
of the wall not exposed to fire, the contribution of the
finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be deter-
mined as follows: The thickness of the finish shall
first be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness
of the finish by the applicable factor determined from
Table 721.2.1.4(1) based on the type of aggregate in
the concrete. The corrected thickness of finish shall
then be added to the actual or equivalent thickness of
concrete and fire-resistance rating of the concrete and
finish determined from Table 721.2 .1.1, Figure
721.2.1.2 or Table 721.2.1.2(1).
721.2.1.4.2 Fire-exposed side. Where gypsum wall-
board or plaster is applied to the fire-exposed side of
the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total
fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows:
The time assigned to the finish as established by Table
721.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rat-
ing determined from Table 721.2.1.1 or Figure
721.2.1.2, or Table 721.2.1.2(1) for the concrete
a lone , o r to the ra t ing d e te rm ined in Sec t ion
721 .2 .1 .4 .1 fo r the conc re te and fin ish on the
nonfire-exposed side.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.1.3.1
CERAMIC FIBER JOINT PROTECTION

148

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:25 PM

56

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.2.1.4(1)
MULTIPLYING FACTOR FOR FINISHES ON NONFIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

TYPE OF AGGREGATE USED IN CONCRETE OR CONCRETE MASONRY

Concrete: siliceous
or carbonate
Concrete Masonry:
siliceous or carbonate;
solid clay brick

Concrete: sand-lightweight
Concrete Masonry: clay tile;
hollow clay brick; concrete
masonry units of expanded
shale and <20% sand

Concrete: lightweight
Concrete Masonry:
concrete masonry units
of expanded shale,
expanded clay,
expanded slag, or
pumice < 20% sand

Concrete Masonry:
concrete masonry units
of expanded slag,
expanded clay, or pumice

1.00

1.25

1.75

3.00

0.75a

1.00

1.50

2.25

0.75a

1.00

1.25

2.25

0.50a

1.00

1.25

2.25

TYPE OF FINISH APPLIED TO CONCRETE OR
CONCRETE MASONRY WALL

Portland cement-sand plaster

Gypsum-sand plaster

Gypsum-vermiculite or perlite plaster

Gypsum wallboard

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. For portland cement-sand plaster 5/8 inch or less in thickness and applied directly to the concrete or concrete masonry on the nonfire-exposed side of the wall, the
multiplying factor shall be 1.00.

TABLE 721.2.1.4(2)
TIME ASSIGNED TO FINISH MATERIALS ON FIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

FINISH DESCRIPTION

TIME (minute)

Gypsum wallboard
3/8 inch
1/2 inch
5/8 inch
2 layers of 3/8 inch
1 layer 3/8 inch, 1 layer 1/2 inch
2 layers 1/2 inch
Type X gypsum wallboard
1/2 inch
5/8 inch
Portland cement-sand plaster applied directly to concrete masonry
Portland cement-sand plaster on metal lath
3/4 inch
7/8 inch
1 inch
Gypsum sand plaster on 3/8-inch gypsum lath
1/2 inch
5/8 inch
3/4 inch
Gypsum sand plaster on metal lath
3/4 inch
7/8 inch
1 inch

10
15
20
25
35
40

25
40
See Note a

20
25
30

35
40
50

50
60
80

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. The actual thickness of portland cement-sand plaster, provided it is 5/8 inch or less in thickness, shall be permitted to be included in determining the equivalent
thickness of the masonry for use in Table 721.3.2.

721.2.1.4.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall
having no finish on one side or different types or
thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation pro-
cedures of Sections 721.2.1.4.1 and 721.2.1.4.2 shall
be performed twice, assuming either side of the wall
to be the fire-exposed side. The fire-resistance rating
of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two val-
ues.

Exception: For an exterior wall with a fire separa-
tion distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) the fire
shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

721.2.1.4.4 Minimum concrete fire-resistance rat-
ing. Where finishes applied to one or both sides of a
concrete wall contribute to the fire-resistance rating,
the concrete alone shall provide not less than one-half
of the total required fire-resistance rating. Addition-
ally, the contribution to the fire resistance of the finish
on the nonfire-exposed side of a load-bearing wall
shall not exceed one-half the contribution of the con-
crete alone.

721.2.1.4.5 Concrete finishes. Finishes on concrete
walls that are assumed to contribute to the total

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

149

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:25 PM

57

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

fire-resistance rating of the wall shall comply with the
installation requirements of Section 721.3.2.5.
721.2.2 Concrete floor and roof slabs. Reinforced and
prestressed floors and roofs shall comply with Section
721.2.2.1. Multicourse floors and roofs shall comply with
Sections 721.2.2.2 and 721.2.2.3, respectively.
721.2.2.1 Reinforced and prestressed floors and
roofs. The minimum thicknesses of reinforced and pre-
stressed concrete floor or roof slabs for fire-resistance
ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours are shown in Table 721.2.2.1.

TABLE 721.2.2.1
MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (inches)

t

+

4
t
s

æ
ç

ç
ç
è

-

1

ö
÷

÷
÷
ø

æ
ç

ç

ç
è

-

t

t

e

ö
÷

÷

÷
ø

(Equation 7-5)

where:
s
= Spacing of ribs or undulations.
t
= Minimum thickness.
te
= Equivalent thickness of the slab calculated as
the net area of the slab divided by the width, in
which the maximum thickness used in the cal-
culation shall not exceed 2t.

CONCRETE TYPE

Siliceous
Carbonate
Sand-lightweight
Lightweight

1

3.5
3.2
2.7
2.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hour)
11/2

2

3

4.3
4.0
3.3
3.1

5.0
4.6
3.8
3.6

6.2
5.7
4.6
4.4

4

7.0
6.6
5.4
5.1

721.2.2.1.1 Hollow-core prestressed slabs. For hol-
low-core prestressed concrete slabs in which the cores
are of constant cross section throughout the length,
the equivalent thickness shall be permitted to be
obtained by dividing the net cross-sectional area of
the slab including grout in the joints, by its width.
721.2.2.1.2 Slabs with sloping soffits. The thickness
of slabs with sloping soffits (see Figure 721.2.2.1.2)
shall be determined at a distance 2t or 6 inches (152
mm), whichever is less, from the point of minimum
thickness, where t is the minimum thickness.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.2.1.3
SLABS WITH RIBBED OR UNDULATING SOFFITS

721.2.2.2 Multicourse floors. The fire-resistance rat-
ings of floors that consist of a base slab of concrete with a
topping (overlay) of a different type of concrete shall
comply with Figure 721.2.2.2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.2.1.2
DETERMINATION OF SLAB THICKNESS
FOR SLOPING SOFFITS

721.2.2.1.3 Slabs with ribbed soffits. The thickness
of slabs with ribbed or undulating soffits (see Figure
721.2.2.1.3) shall be determined by one of the follow-
ing expressions, whichever is applicable:
For s > 4t, the thickness to be used shall be t
For s £ 2t, the thickness to be used shall be te
For 4t > s > 2t, the thickness to be used shall be

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.2.2
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR TWO-COURSE
CONCRETE FLOORS

150

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:29 PM

58

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

721.2.2.3 Multicourse roofs. The fire-resistance ratings
of roofs which consist of a base slab of concrete with a
topping (overlay) of an insulating concrete or with an
insulating board and built-up roofing shall comply with
Figures 721.2.2.3(1) and 721.2.2.3(2).

721.2.2.3.1 Heat transfer. For the transfer of heat,
three-ply built-up roofing contributes 10 minutes to
the fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating
for concrete assemblies such as those shown in Figure
721.2.2.3(1) shall be increased by 10 minutes. This
increase is not applicable to those shown in Figure
721.2.2.3(2).

721.2.2.4 Joints in precast slabs. Joints between adja-
cent precast concrete slabs need not be considered in cal-
culating the slab thickness provided that a concrete
topping at least 1 inch (25 mm) thick is used. Where no
concrete topping is used, joints must be grouted to a
depth of at least one-third the slab thickness at the joint,
but not less than 1 inch (25 mm), or the joints must be
made fire resistant by other approved methods.

721.2.3 Concrete cover over reinforcement. The mini-
mum thickness of concrete cover over reinforcement in con-
crete slabs, reinforced beams and prestressed beams shall
comply with this section.

721.2.3.1 Slab cover. The minimum thickness of con-
crete cover to the positive moment reinforcement shall
comply with Table 721.2.3(1) for reinforced concrete
and Table 721.2.3(2) for prestressed concrete. These
tables are applicable for solid or hollow-core one-way or
two-way slabs with flat undersurfaces. These tables are
applicable to slabs that are either cast in place or precast.
For precast prestressed concrete not covered elsewhere,
the procedures contained in PCI MNL 124 shall be
acceptable.

721.2.3.2 Reinforced beam cover. The minimum thick-
ness of concrete cover to the positive moment reinforce-
ment (bottom steel) for reinforced concrete beams is
shown in Table 721.2.3(3) for fire-resistance ratings of 1
hour to 4 hours.

721.2.3.3 Prestressed beam cover. The minimum thick-
n e s s o f c o n c r e t e c ove r t o t h e p o s i t ive m om e n t
prestressing tendons (bottom steel) for restrained and
unrestrained prestressed concrete beams and stemmed
units shall comply with the values shown in Tables
721.2.3(4) and 721.2.3(5) for fire-resistance ratings of 1
hour to 4 hours. Values in Table 721.2.3(4) apply to
beams 8 inches (203 mm) or greater in width. Values in
Table 721.2.3(5) apply to beams or stems of any width,
provided the cross-section area is not less than 40 square
inches (25 806 mm2). In case of differences between the
values determined from Table 721.2.3(4) or 721.2.3(5),
it is permitted to use the smaller value. The concrete
cover shall be calculated in accordance with Section
7 2 1 . 2 . 3 . 3 . 1 . T h e m i n im um c o n c r e t e c o v e r f o r
nonprestressed reinforcement in prestressed concrete
beams shall comply with Section 721.2.3.2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.2.3(1)
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR CONCRETE
ROOF ASSEMBLIES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.2.2.3(2)
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR CONCRETE
ROOF ASSEMBLIES

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

151

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:33 PM

59

152

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.2.3(1)
COVER THICKNESS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (inches)

CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

Restrained

Unrestrained

1

11/2

2

3

4

1

11/2

2

3

4

Siliceous

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

1

11/4
11/4
11/4

15/8
11/4
11/4

Carbonate

3/4
3/4

Sand-lightweight or lightweight

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE 721.2.3(2)
COVER THICKNESS FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (inches)

CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

Restrained

Unrestrained

1

11/2

2

3

4

1

11/2

2

3

4

Siliceous

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

11/8
1

11/2
13/8
13/8

13/4
15/8
11/2

23/8
21/8
2

23/4
21/4
21/4

Carbonate

Sand-lightweight or lightweight

1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE 721.2.3(3)
MINIMUM COVER FOR MAIN REINFORCING BARS OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMSc
(APPLICABLE TO ALL TYPES OF STRUCTURAL CONCRETE)

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa

BEAM WIDTHb
(inches)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

1

11/2

2

3

4

Restrained

5
7
³ 10

3/4
3/4
3/4
3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

3/4
3/4
3/4

1a

3/4
3/4

11/4

a

3/4
3/4

Unrestrained

5
7
³ 10

1

3/4
3/4

11/4

3/4
3/4

—
13/4
1

—
3
13/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover
of 3/4 inch is adequate for ratings of 4 hours or less.
b. For beam widths between the tabulated values, the minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.
c. The cover for an individual reinforcing bar is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the bar and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For beams
in which several bars are used, the cover for corner bars used in the calculation shall be reduced to one-half of the actual value. The cover for an individual bar must
be not less than one-half of the value given in Table 721.2.3(3) nor less than 3/4 inch.

TABLE 721.2.3(4)
MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS 8 INCHES OR GREATER IN WIDTH

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa

CONCRETE
AGGREGATE TYPE

BEAM WIDTHb
(inches)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
11/2

1

2

3

4

Restrained

Carbonate or siliceous
Carbonate or siliceous
Sand lightweight
Sand lightweight

8
³ 12
8
³ 12

11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2

11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
13/4
11/2
11/2
11/2

11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
21/2
17/8
2
15/8

13/4
11/2
11/2
11/2
5c
21/2
31/4
2

a

21/2
17/8
2a
15/8
—
3
—
21/2

a
a

a

Unrestrained

Carbonate or siliceous
Carbonate or siliceous
Sand lightweight
Sand lightweight

8
³ 12
8
³ 12

a

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover
of 3/4 inch is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.
b. For beam widths between 8 inches and 12 inches, minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.
c. Not practical for 8-inch-wide beam but shown for purposes of interpolation.

60

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:34 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.2.3(5)
MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS OF ALL WIDTHS

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa

CONCRETE
AGGREGATE TYPE

BEAM AREAb
A (square inches)

Restrained

Unrestrained

All
Carbonate or
siliceous
Sand lightweight
All
Carbonate or
siliceous
Sand lightweight

40 £ A £ 150
150 < A £ 300
300 < A
150 < A
40 £ A £ 150
150 < A £ 300
300 < A
150 < A

1

11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
2
11/2
11/2
11/2

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
11/2

2

3

11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
21/2
13/4
11/2
11/2

2
11/2
11/2
11/2
—
21/2
2
2

21/2
13/4
11/2
11/2
—
—
3c
3c

4

—
21/2
2
2
—
—
4c
4c

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover
of 3/4 inch is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.
b. The cross-sectional area of a stem is permitted to include a portion of the area in the flange, provided the width of the flange used in the calculation does not exceed
three times the average width of the stem.
c. U-shaped or hooped stirrups spaced not to exceed the depth of the member and having a minimum cover of 1 inch shall be provided.

721.2.3.3.1 Calculating concrete cover. The con-
crete cover for an individual tendon is the minimum
thickness of concrete between the surface of the ten-
don and the fire-exposed surface of the beam, except
that for ungrouted ducts, the assumed cover thick-
ness is the minimum thickness of concrete between
the surface of the duct and the fire-exposed surface
of the beam. For beams in which two or more ten-
dons are used, the cover is assumed to be the average
of the minimum cover of the individual tendons. For
corner tendons (tendons equal distance from the bot-
tom and side), the minimum cover used in the calcu-
la t ion sha l l be one -ha l f the ac tua l va lue . Fo r
stemmed members with two or more prestressing
tendons located along the vertical centerline of the
stem, the average cover shall be the distance from the
bottom of the member to the centroid of the tendons.
The actual cover for any individual tendon shall not
be less than one-half the smaller value shown in
Tables 721.2.3(4) and 721.2.3(5), or 1 inch (25 mm),
whichever is greater.

721.2.4 Concrete columns. Concrete columns shall com-
ply with this section.

TABLE 721.2.4
MINIMUM DIMENSION OF CONCRETE COLUMNS (inches)

TYPES OF
CONCRETE

Siliceous

Carbonate

Sand-lightweight

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

1

8

8

8

11/2

9

9

81/2

2a

10

10

9

3a

12

11

101/2

4b

14

12

12

For SI: 1 inch = 25 mm.
a. The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 8 inches for rectangu-
lar columns with two parallel sides at least 36 inches in length.
b. The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 10 inches for rectan-
gular columns with two parallel sides at least 36 inches in length.

721.2.4.1 Minimum size. The minimum overall dimen-
sions of reinforced concrete columns for fire-resistance
ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours for exposure to fire on all
sides shall comply with this section.

721.2.4.1.1 Concrete strength less than or equal to
12,000 psi. For columns made with concrete having a
specified compressive strength, f ¢c, of less than or
equal to 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa), the minimum dimen-
sion shall comply with Table 721.2.4.

721.2.4.1.2 Concrete strength greater than 12,000
psi. For columns made with concrete having a speci-
fied compressive strength, f ¢c, greater than 12,000 psi
(82.7 MPa), for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4
hours the minimum dimension shall be 24 inches (610
mm).

721.2.4.2 Minimum cover for R/C columns. The mini-
mum thickness of concrete cover to the main longitudi-
nal reinforcement in columns, regardless of the type of
aggregate used in the concrete and the specified com-
pressive strength of concrete, f ¢c, shall not be less than 1
inch (25 mm) times the number of hours of required fire
resistance or 2 inches (51 mm), whichever is less.

721.2.4.3 Tie and spiral reinforcement. For concrete
columns made with concrete having a specified com-
pressive strength, f ¢c, greater than 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa),
tie and spiral reinforcement shall comply with the fol-
lowing:

1. The free ends of rectangular ties shall terminate
with a 135-degree (2.4 rad) standard tie hook.
2. The free ends of circular ties shall terminate with a
90-degree (1.6 rad) standard tie hook.
3. The free ends of spirals, including at lap splices,
shall terminate with a 90-degree (1.6 rad) standard
tie hook.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

153

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:34 PM

61

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

The hook extension at the free end of ties and spirals
shall be the larger of six bar diameters and the extension
required by Section 7.1.3 of ACI 318. Hooks shall pro-
ject into the core of the column.
721.2.4.4 Columns built into walls. The minimum
dimensions of Table 721.2.4 do not apply to a reinforced
concrete column that is built into a concrete or masonry
wall provided all of the following are met:
1. The fire-resistance rating for the wall is equal to or
greater than the required rating of the column;
2. The main longitudinal reinforcing in the column
has cover not less than that required by Section
721.2.4.2; and
3. Openings in the wall are protected in accordance
with Table 715.4.
Where openings in the wall are not protected as
required by Section 715.4, the minimum dimension of
columns required to have a fire-resistance rating of 3
hours or less shall be 8 inches (203 mm), and 10 inches
(254 mm) for columns required to have a fire-resistance
rating of 4 hours, regardless of the type of aggregate used
in the concrete.
721.2.4.5 Precast cover units for steel columns. See
Section 721.5.1.4.
721.3 Concrete masonry. The provisions of this section con-
tain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of concrete
masonry are established by calculations.
721.3.1 Equivalent thickness. The equivalent thickness of
concrete masonry construction shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
721.3.1.1 Concrete masonry unit plus finishes. The
equivalent thickness of concrete masonry assemblies,
Tea, shall be computed as the sum of the equivalent thick-
ness of the concrete masonry unit, Te, as determined by
Section 721.3.1.2, 721.3.1.3 or 721.3.1.4, plus the equiv-
alent thickness of finishes, Tef, determined in accordance
with Section 721.3.2:

➡

Tea = Te + Tef

(Equation 7-6)

721.3.1.2 Ungrouted or partially grouted construc-
tion. Te shall be the value obtained for the concrete
masonry unit determined in accordance with ASTM C
140.
721.3.1.3 Solid grouted construction. The equivalent
thickness, Te, of solid grouted concrete masonry units is
the actual thickness of the unit.
721.3.1.4 Airspaces and cells filled with loose-fill
material. The equivalent thickness of completely filled
hollow concrete masonry is the actual thickness of the
unit when loose-fill materials are: sand, pea gravel,
crushed stone, or slag that meet ASTM C 33 require-
ments; pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay,
expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or cin-
ders that comply with ASTM C 331; or perlite or vermic-
ulite meeting the requirements of ASTM C 549 and
ASTM C 516, respectively.
721.3.2 Concrete masonry walls. The fire-resistance rat-
ing of walls and partitions constructed of concrete masonry
units shall be determined from Table 721.3.2. The rating
shall be based on the equivalent thickness of the masonry
and type of aggregate used.
721.3.2.1 Finish on nonfire-exposed side. Where plas-
ter or gypsum wallboard is applied to the side of the wall
not exposed to fire, the contribution of the finish to the
total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as fol-
lows: The thickness of gypsum wallboard or plaster shall
be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness of the
finish by applicable factor determined from Table
721.2.1.4(1). This corrected thickness of finish shall be
added to the equivalent thickness of masonry and the
fire-resistance rating of the masonry and finish deter-
mined from Table 721.3.2.
721.3.2.2 Finish on fire-exposed side. Where plaster or
gypsum wallboard is applied to the fire-exposed side of
the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total
fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The
time assigned to the finish as established by Table
721.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rating
determined in Section 721.3.2 for the masonry alone, or

TABLE 721.3.2
MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS (inches) OF BEARING OR NONBEARING CONCRETE MASONRY WALLSa,b,c,d

TYPE OF AGGREGATE

Pumice or expanded slag

Expanded shale, clay or slate

Limestone, cinders or unexpanded slag

Calcareous or siliceous gravel

1/2

1.5

1.8

1.9

2.0

3/4

1.9

2.2

2.3

2.4

1

2.1

2.6

2.7

2.8

11/4

2.5

2.9

3.1

3.2

11/2

2.7

3.3

3.4

3.6

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
13/4
21/4
21/2
23/4

2

3.0

3.4

3.7

3.9

3.2

3.6

4.0

4.2

3.4

3.8

4.3

4.5

3.6

4.0

4.5

4.8

3.8

4.2

4.8

5.0

3

4.0

4.4

5.0

5.3

31/4

4.2

4.6

5.2

5.5

31/2

4.4

4.8

5.5

5.8

33/4

4.5

4.9

5.7

6.0

4

4.7

5.1

5.9

6.2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Values between those shown in the table can be determined by direct interpolation.
b. Where combustible members are framed into the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between
members set in from opposite sides, shall not be less than 93 percent of the thickness shown in the table.
c. Requirements of ASTM C 55, ASTM C 73, ASTM C 90 or ASTM C 744 shall apply.
d. Minimum required equivalent thickness corresponding to the hourly fire-resistance rating for units with a combination of aggregate shall be determined by linear
interpolation based on the percent by volume of each aggregate used in manufacture.

154

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:35 PM

62

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

in Section 721.3.2.1 for the masonry and finish on the
nonfire-exposed side.

721.3.2.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall hav-
ing no finish on one side or having different types or
thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation proce-
dures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming
either side of the wall to be the fire-exposed side. The
fire-resistance rating of the wall shall not exceed the
lower of the two values calculated.

Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation
distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) the fire shall
be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

721.3.2.4 Minimum concrete masonry fire-resistance
rating. Where the finish applied to a concrete masonry
wall contributes to its fire-resistance rating, the masonry
alone shall provide not less than one-half the total
required fire-resistance rating.

TABLE 721.3.4
MINIMUM COVER OF LONGITUDINAL
REINFORCEMENT IN FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED
REINFORCED CONCRETE MASONRY LINTELS (inches)

NOMINAL WIDTH
OF LINTEL (inches)

6
8
10 or greater

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

1

11/2
11/2
11/2

2

2
11/2
11/2

3

—
13/4
11/2

4

—
3
13/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

721.3.5 Concrete masonry columns. The fire-resistance
rating of concrete masonry columns shall be determined
based upon the least plan dimension of the column in accor-
dance with Table 721.3.5 or by approved alternate methods.

TABLE 721.3.5
MINIMUM DIMENSION OF
CONCRETE MASONRY COLUMNS (inches)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)

721.3.2.5 Attachment of finishes. Installation of fin-
ishes shall be as follows:

1

2

3

4

8 inches

10 inches

12 inches

14 inches

1. Gypsum wallboard and gypsum lath applied to
concrete masonry or concrete walls shall be
secured to wood or steel furring members spaced
not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center (o.c.).
2. Gypsum wallboard shall be installed with the long
dimension parallel to the furring members and
shall have all joints finished.
3. Other aspects of the installation of finishes shall
comply with the applicable provisions of Chapters
7 and 25.

721.3.3 Multiwythe masonry walls. The fire-resistance
rating of wall assemblies constructed of multiple wythes of
masonry materials shall be permitted to be based on the
fire-resistance rating period of each wythe and the continu-
ous airspace between each wythe in accordance with the fol-
lowing formula:

RA = (R1

0.59 + R2

0.59 + ... + Rn

0.59 + A1 + A2 + ... + An)1.7

(Equation 7-7)

where:
RA = Fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).
R1, R2, ..., Rn = Fire-resistance rating of wythes for 1, 2, n
(hours), respectively.
A1, A2, ...., An = 0.30, factor for each continuous airspace
for 1, 2, ...n, respectively, having a depth of
1 / 2 inch (12 .7 mm ) o r mo re be tween
wythes.

721.3.4 Concrete masonry lintels. Fire-resistance ratings for
concrete masonry lintels shall be determined based upon the
nominal thickness of the lintel and the minimum thickness of
concrete masonry or concrete, or any combination thereof,
covering the main reinforcing bars, as determined accord-
ing to Table 721.3.4, or by approved alternate methods.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

721.4 Clay brick and tile masonry. The provisions of this sec-
tion contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of
clay brick and tile masonry are established by calculations.
721.4.1 Masonry walls. The fire-resistance rating of
masonry walls shall be based upon the equivalent thickness
as calculated in accordance with this section. The calcula-
tion shall take into account finishes applied to the wall and
airspaces between wythes in multiwythe construction.
721.4.1.1 Equivalent thickness. The fire-resistance rat-
ings of walls or partitions constructed of solid or hollow
clay masonry units shall be determined from Table
721.4.1(1) or 721.4.1(2). The equivalent thickness of the
clay masonry unit shall be determined by Equation 7-8
when using Table 721.4.1(1). The fire-resistance rating
determined from Table 721.4.1(1) shall be permitted to
be used in the calculated fire-resistance rating procedure
in Section 721.4.2.

(Equation 7-8)

Te = Vn /LH
where:
Te = The equivalent thickness of the clay masonry unit
(inches).
Vn = The net volume of the clay masonry unit (inch 3).
L = The specified length of the clay masonry unit
(inches).
H = The specified height of the clay masonry unit
(inches).
721.4.1.1.1 Hollow clay units. The equivalent thick-
ness, Te, shall be the value obtained for hollow clay
units as determined in accordance with Equation 7-8.
The net volume, Vn, of the units shall be determined
using the gross volume and percentage of void area
determined in accordance with ASTM C 67.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

155

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:36 PM

63

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.4.1(1)
FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS OF CLAY MASONRY WALLS

MATERIAL TYPE

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT THICKNESS FOR FIRE RESISTANCEa, b, c (inches)
1 hour
2 hour
3 hour
4 hour

Solid brick of clay or shaled
Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, unfilled
Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, grouted or filled with
materials specified in Section 721.4.1.1.3

2.7
2.3

3.0

3.8
3.4

4.4

4.9
4.3

5.5

6.0
5.0

6.6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Equivalent thickness as determined from Section 721.4.1.1.
b. Calculated fire resistance between the hourly increments listed shall be determined by linear interpolation.
c. Where combustible members are framed in the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between
members set in from opposite sides, shall not be less than 93 percent of the thickness shown.
d. For units in which the net cross-sectional area of cored brick in any plane parallel to the surface containing the cores is at least 75 percent of the gross cross-sec-
tional area measured in the same plane.

TABLE 721.4.1(2)
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR BEARING STEEL FRAME
BRICK VENEER WALLS OR PARTITIONS

WALL OR PARTITION ASSEMBLY

PLASTER SIDE
EXPOSED (hours)

BRICK FACED SIDE
EXPOSED (hours)

Outside facing of steel studs:
1/2² wood fiberboard sheathing next to studs, 3/4² airspace formed with
3/4² ´ 1 5/8² wood strips placed over the fiberboard and secured to the studs;
metal or wire lath nailed to such strips, 33/4² brick veneer held in place by filling 3/4²
airspace between the brick and lath with mortar. Inside facing of studs: 3/4² unsanded
gypsum plaster on metal or wire lath attached to 5/16² wood strips secured to edges of the
studs.
Outside facing of steel studs:
1² insulation board sheathing attached to studs, 1² airspace, and 33/4² brick veneer
attached to steel frame with metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 7/8²
sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix) applied on metal or wire lath attached directly to the
studs.
Same as above except use 7/8² vermiculite—gypsum plaster or 1² sanded gypsum plaster
(1:2 mix) applied to metal or wire.
Outside facing of steel studs:
1/2² gypsum sheathing board, attached to studs, and 33/4² brick veneer attached to steel
frame with metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 1/2² sanded gypsum plaster
(1:2 mix) applied to 1/2² perforated gypsum lath securely attached to studs and having
strips of metal lath 3 inches wide applied to all horizontal joints of gypsum lath.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1.5

1.5

2

2

4

4

4

4

721.4.1.1.2 Solid grouted clay units. The equivalent
thickness of solid grouted clay masonry units shall be
taken as the actual thickness of the units.
721.4.1.1.3 Units with filled cores. The equivalent
thickness of the hollow clay masonry units is the
actual thickness of the unit when completely filled
with loose-fill materials of: sand, pea gravel, crushed
stone, or slag that meet ASTM C 33 requirements;
pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay,
expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or
cinders in compliance with ASTM C 331; or perlite or
vermiculite meeting the requirements of ASTM C
549 and ASTM C 516, respectively.
721.4.1.2 Plaster finishes. Where plaster is applied to
the wall, the total fire-resistance rating shall be deter-
mined by the formula:

where:
R = The fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).
Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individual wall
(hours).
pl = Coefficient for thickness of plaster.

Values for Rn
0.59 for use in Equation 7-9 are given in
Table 721.4.1(3). Coefficients for thickness of plaster
shall be selected from Table 721.4.1(4) based on the
actual thickness of plaster applied to the wall or partition
and whether one or two sides of the wall are plastered.

721.4.1.3 Multiwythe walls with airspace. Where a
continuous airspace separates multiple wythes of the
wall or partition, the total fire-resistance rating shall be
determined by the formula:

R = (Rn

0.59 + pl) 1.7

(Equation 7-9)

R = (R1

0.59 + R2

0.59 + ...+Rn

0.59 + as) 1.7

(Equation 7-10)

156

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg156.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:41:29 AM

64

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

where:
R

= The fire-resistance rating of the assem-
bly (hours).
R1, R2 and Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individ-
ual wythes (hours).
= Coefficient for continuous airspace.
Values for Rn
0.59 for use in Equation 7-10 are given in
Table 721.4.1(3). The coefficient for each continuous
airspace of 1/2 inch to 31/2 inches (12.7 to 89 mm) separat-
ing two individual wythes shall be 0.3.

as

TABLE 721.4.1(3)
VALUES OF Rn

0.59

R (hours)

1.0

1.50

1.91

2.27

0.59

Rn

1

2

3

4

TABLE 721.4.1(4)
COEFFICIENTS FOR PLASTER, pl a

THICKNESS OF
PLASTER (inch)

ONE SIDE

TWO SIDE

1/2
5/8
3/4

0.3

0.37

0.45

0.6

0.75

0.90

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Values listed in table are for 1:3 sanded gypsum plaster.

TABLE 721.4.1(5)
REINFORCED MASONRY LINTELS

NOMINAL
LINTEL WIDTH
(inches)

MINIMUM LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT COVER
FOR FIRE RESISTANCE (inch)

1 hour

2 hour

3 hour

4 hour

6

8

10 or more

11/2
11/2
11/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
NP = Not permitted.

2
11/2
11/2

NP
13/4
11/2

NP

3
13/4

TABLE 721.4.1(6)
REINFORCED CLAY MASONRY COLUMNS

COLUMN SIZE

Minimum column dimension (inches)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING
(hour)

1

8

2

10

3

12

4

14

721.4.1.4 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall hav-
ing no finish on one side or having different types or
thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation proce-
dures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

either side to be the fire-exposed side of the wall. The fire
resistance of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the
two values determined.
Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation
distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), the fire shall
be assumed to occur on the interior side only.
721.4.2 Multiwythe walls. The fire-resistance rating for
walls or partitions consisting of two or more dissimilar
wythes shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

0.59 + R2

0.59 + ...+Rn

0.59) 1.7

(Equation 7-11)

R = (R1
where:
R

= The fire-resistance rating of the assembly
(hours).
R1, R2 and Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individual
wythes (hours).
Values for Rn
0.59 for use in Equation 7-11 are given in
Table 721.4.1(3).
721.4.2.1 Multiwythe walls of different material. For
walls that consist of two or more wythes of different
materials (concrete or concrete masonry units) in combi-
nation with clay masonry units, the fire-resistance rating
of the different materials shall be permitted to be deter-
mined from Table 721.2.1.1 for concrete; Table 721.3.2
for concrete masonry units or Table 721.4.1(1) or
721.4.1(2) for clay and tile masonry units.
721.4.3 Reinforced clay masonry lintels. Fire-resistance
ratings for clay masonry lintels shall be determined based
on the nominal width of the lintel and the minimum cover-
ing for the longitudinal reinforcement in accordance with
Table 721.4.1(5).
721.4.4 Reinforced clay masonry columns. The fire-resis-
tance ratings shall be determined based on the last plan
dimension of
the column in accordance with Table
721.4.1(6). The minimum cover for longitudinal reinforce-
ment shall be 2 inches (51 mm).
721.5 Steel assemblies. The provisions of this section contain
procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of steel assem-
blies are established by calculations.
721.5.1 Structural steel columns. The fire-resistance rat-
ings of steel columns shall be based on the size of the ele-
ment and the type of protection provided in accordance with
this section.
721.5.1.1 General. These procedures establish a basis
for determining the fire resistance of column assemblies
as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant material
and, the weight, W, and heated perimeter, D, of steel col-
umns. As used in these sections, W is the average weight
of a structural steel column in pounds per linear foot. The
heated perimeter, D, is the inside perimeter of the
fire-resistant material in inches as illustrated in Figure
721.5.1(1).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

157

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:37 PM

65

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

721.5.1.2.1 Attachment. The gypsum wallboard
shall be supported as illustrated in either Figure
721.5.1(2) for fire-resistance ratings of 4 hours or
less, or Figure 721.5.1(3) for fire-resistance ratings of
3 hours or less.

FIGURE 721.5.1(1)
DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER
OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

721.5.1.1.1 Nonload-bearing protection. The appli-
cation of these procedures shall be limited to column
assemblies in which the fire-resistant material is not
designed to carry any of the load acting on the col-
umn.

721.5.1.1.2 Embedments. In the absence of substan-
tiating fire-endurance test results, ducts, conduit, pip-
ing, and similar mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
installations shall not be embedded in any required
fire-resistant materials.

721 .5 .1 .1 .3 We igh t - to -per ime ter ra t io . Tab le
721.5.1(1) contains weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios
(W/D) for both contour and box fire-resistant profiles,
for the wide flange shapes most often used as columns.
For different fire-resistant protection profiles or col-
umn cross sections, the weight-to-heated-perimeter
ratios (W/D) shall be determined in accordance with
the definitions given in this section.

721.5.1.2 Gypsum wallboard protection. The fire
resistance of structural steel columns with weight-
to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) less than or equal to
3.65 and which are protected with Type X gypsum wall-
board shall be permitted to be determined from the fol-
lowing expression:

R

=

130

0 75
.

D

)

h

é

ê
ë
ê

(

W' /
2

ù

ú
û
ú

where:

(Equation 7-12)

R = Fire resistance (minutes).
h = Total thickness of gypsum wallboard (inches).
D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column
(inches).
W¢ = Total weight of the structural steel column and
gypsum wallboard protection (pounds per linear
foot).
W¢ = W + 50hD/144.

158

FIGURE 721.5.1(2)
GYPSUM WALLBOARD PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL
COLUMNS WITH SHEET STEEL COLUMN COVERS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 305 mm.
1. Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.
2. Type X gypsum wallboard in accordance with ASTM C 36. For single-layer
applications, the wallboard shall be applied vertically with no horizontal
joints. For multiple-layer applications, horizontal joints are permitted at a
minimum spacing of 8 feet, provided that the joints in successive layers are
staggered at least 12 inches. The total required thickness of wallboard shall
be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the
weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column. For fire-resistance
ratings of 2 hours or less, one of the required layers of gypsum wallboard
may be applied to the exterior of the sheet steel column covers with 1-inch-
long Type S screws spaced 1 inch from the wallboard edge and 8 inches on
center. For such installations, 0.0149-inch minimum thickness galvanized
steel corner beads with 11/2-inch legs shall be attached to the wallboard with
Type S screws spaced 12 inches on center.
3. For fire-resistance ratings of 3 hours or less, the column covers shall be fabri-
cated from 0.0239-inch minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel.
For 4-hour fire-resistance ratings, the column covers shall be fabricated from
0.0239-inch minimum thickness stainless steel. The column covers shall be
erected with the Snap Lock or Pittsburgh joint details.
For fire-resistance ratings of 2 hours or less, column covers fabricated from
0.0269-inch minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel shall be permit-
ted to be erected with lap joints. The lap joints shall be permitted to be located
anywhere around the perimeter of the column cover. The lap joints shall be
secured with 1/2-inch-long No. 8 sheet metal screws spaced 12 inches on cen-
ter.
The column covers shall be provided with a minimum expansion clearance
of 1/8 inch per linear foot between the ends of the cover and any restraining
construction.

721.5.1.2.2 Gypsum wallboard equivalent to con-
crete. The determination of the fire resistance of
structural steel columns from Figure 721.5.1(4) is
permitted for various thicknesses of gypsum wall-
board as a function of the weight-to-heated-perimeter
ratio (W/D) of the column. For structural steel col-
umns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D)
greater than 3.65, the thickness of gypsum wallboard
required for specified fire-resistance ratings shall be
the same as the thickness determined for a W14 × 233
wide flange shape.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:39 PM

66

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

721.5.1.3 Sprayed fire-resistant materials. The fire
resistance of wide-flange structural steel columns pro-
tected with sprayed fire-resistant materials, as illustrated
in Figure 721.5.1(5), shall be permitted to be determined
from the following expression:

R C W D C h
/

[

]

)

+

2

=

(

1

(Equation 7-13)

where:
R = Fire resistance (minutes).
h = Th ickness o f sp rayed f i re - res is tan t ma te r ia l
(inches).
D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column
(inches).
C1 and C2 = Material-dependent constants.
W = Weight of structural steel columns (pounds per lin-
ear foot).
The fire resistance of structural steel columns pro-
tected with intumescent or mastic fire-resistant coatings

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in
accordance with Section 703.2.
721.5.1.3.1 Material-dependent constants. The
material-dependent constants, C1 and C2, shall be
determined for specific fire-resistant materials on the
basis of standard fire endurance tests in accordance
with Section 703.2. Unless evidence is submitted to
the building official substantiating a broader applica-
tion, this expression shall be limited to determining
the fire resistance of structural steel columns with
weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) between the
largest and smallest columns for which standard
fire-resistance test results are available.

FIGURE 721.5.1(3)
GYPSUM WALLBOARD PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL
COLUMNS WITH STEEL STUD/SCREW ATTACHMENT SYSTEM

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = -305 mm.
1. Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.
2. 15/8-inch deep studs fabricated from 0.0179-inch minimum thickness galva-
nized steel with 15/16 or 17/16-inch legs. The length of the steel studs shall be
1/2 inch less than the height of the assembly.
3. Type X gypsum wallboard in accordance with ASTM C 36. For single-layer
applications, the wallboard shall be applied vertically with no horizontal
joints. For multiple-layer applications, horizontal joints are permitted at a
minimum spacing of 8 feet, provided that the joints in successive layers are
staggered at least 12 inches. The total required thickness of wallboard shall
be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the
weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column.
4. Galvanized 0.0149-inch minimum thickness steel corner beads with
11/2-inch legs attached to the wallboard with 1-inch-long Type S screws
spaced 12 inches on center.
5. No. 18 SWG steel tie wires spaced 24 inches on center.
6. Sheet metal angles with 2-inch legs fabricated from 0.0221-inch minimum
thickness galvanized steel.
7. Type S screws, 1 inch long, shall be used for attaching the first layer of wall-
board to the steel studs and the third layer to the sheet metal angles at 24 inches
on center. Type S screws 13/4-inch long shall be used for attaching the second
layer of wallboard to the steel studs and the fourth layer to the sheet metal
angles at 12 inches on center. Type S screws 21/4 inches long shall be used for
attaching the third layer of wallboard to the steel studs at 12 inches on center.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per linear foot/inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

FIGURE 721.5.1(4)
FIRE RESISTANCE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS
PROTECTED WITH VARIOUS THICKNESSES OF
TYPE X GYPSUM WALLBOARD

a. The W/D ratios for typical wide flange columns are listed in Table
721.5.1(1). For other column shapes, the W/D ratios shall be determined in
accordance with Section 720.5.1.1.

FIGURE 721.5.1(5)
WIDE FLANGE STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH
SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

159

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:46 PM

67

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

721.5.1.3.2 Identification. Sprayed fire-resistant
materials shall be identified by density and thickness
required for a given fire-resistance rating.

721.5.1.4 Concrete-protected columns. The fire resis-
tance of structural steel columns protected with con-
crete, as illustrated in Figure 721.5.1(6) (a) and (b), shall
be permitted to be determined from the following expres-
sion:

(Equation 7-14)

R = Ro (1 + 0.03m)
where:
Ro = 10 (W/D) 0.7 + 17 (h1.6/kc
0.2) × [1 + 26 {H/pccch (L + h)}0.8]
As used in these expressions:
R = Fire endurance at equilibrium moisture conditions
(minutes).
Ro = Fire endurance at zero moisture content (minutes).
m = Equilibrium moisture content of the concrete by
volume (percent).
W = Average weight of the steel column (pounds per
linear foot).
D = Heated perimeter of the steel column (inches).
h = Thickness of the concrete cover (inches).
kc = Ambient temperature thermal conductivity of the
concrete (Btu/hr ft °F).
H = Ambient temperature thermal capacity of the steel
column = 0.11W (Btu/ ft °F).
pc = Concrete density (pounds per cubic foot).
cc = Ambient temperature specific heat of concrete
(Btu/lb °F).
L = Interior dimension of one side of a square concrete
box protection (inches).
721.5.1.4.1 Reentrant space filled. For wide-flange
steel columns completely encased in concrete with all
reentrant spaces filled [Figure 721.5.1(6)(c)], the
thermal capacity of the concrete within the reentrant
spaces shall be permitted to be added to the thermal
capacity of the steel column, as follows:

(Equation 7-15)

H = 0.11W + (pccc/144) (bfd -As)
where:
bf
= Flange width of the steel column (inches).
d
= Depth of the steel column (inches).
As = Cross-sectional area of the steel column
(square inches).
721.5.1.4.2 Concrete properties unknown. If spe-
cific data on the properties of concrete are not avail-
ab le , the va lues g iven in Tab le 721 .5 .1 (2 ) a re
permitted.
721.5.1.4.3 Minimum concrete cover. For structural
steel column encased in concrete with all reentrant
space s fi l led , F igu re 721 .5 .1 (6 ) (c ) and Tab le s
721.5.1(7) and 721.5.1(8) indicate the thickness of

160

07_ibc_2009pg160.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 1:27:28 PM

68

concrete cover required for various fire-resistance
ratings for typical wide-flange sections. The thick-
nesses of concrete indicated in these tables also apply
to structural steel columns larger than those listed.
721.5.1.4.4 Minimum precast concrete cover. For
structural steel columns protected with precast con-
c r e t e c o l u m n c o v e r s a s s h o w n i n F i g u r e
721.5.1(6)(a), Tables 721.5.1(9) and 721.5.1(10)
indicate the thickness of the column covers required
f o r va r io u s f i re - re s i s ta n c e ra t in g s fo r typ i c a l
wide-flange shapes. The thicknesses of concrete
given in these tables also apply to structural steel col-
umns larger than those listed.

FIGURE 721.5.1(6)
CONCRETE PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNSa,b

a. When the inside perimeter of the concrete protection is not square, L shall be
taken as the average of L1 and L2. When the thickness of concrete cover is not
constant, h shall be taken as the average of h1 and h2.
b. Joints shall be protected with a minimum 1 inch thickness of ceramic fiber
blanket but in no case less than one-half the thickness of the column cover
(see Section 720.2.1.3).

721.5.1.4.5 Masonry protection. The fire resistance
of structural steel columns protected with concrete
masonry units or clay masonry units as illustrated in
Figure 721.5.1(7), shall be permitted to be deter-
mined from the following expression:

R = 0 .17 (W /D) 0 .7 + [0 .285 (T e
[1 .0 + 42 .7 { (A s/dm T e) / (0 .25p + T e) } 0 .8 ]
(Equation 7-16)

1 .6/K0 .2) ]

where:
R
= Fire-resistance rating of column assembly
(hours).
W = Average weight of steel column (pounds per
foot).
D = Heated perimeter of steel column (inches)
[see Figure 721.5.1(7)].
Te = Equivalent thickness of concrete or clay ma-
sonry unit (inches) (see Table 721.3.2 Note a
or Section 721.4.1).
K = Thermal conductivity of concrete or clay ma-
s o n r y u n i t ( B t u / h r f t ° F ) [ s e e T a b l e
721.5.1(3)].
As = Cross-sectional area of steel column (square
inches).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

dm = Density of the concrete or clay masonry unit
(pounds per cubic foot).
= Inner perimeter of concrete or clay masonry
protection (inches) [see Figure 721.5.1(7)].

p

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 721.5.1(7)
CONCRETE OR CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED
STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

d = Depth of a wide flange column, outside diameter of pipe column, or out-
side dimension of structural tubing column (inches).
tweb = Thickness of web of wide flange column (inches).
w = Width of flange of wide flange column (inches).

721.5.1.4.6 Equivalent concrete masonry thick-
ness. For structural steel columns protected with con-
crete masonry, Table 721.5.1(5) gives the equivalent
thickness of concrete masonry required for various
fire-resistance ratings for typical column shapes. For
structural steel columns protected with clay masonry,
Table 721.5.1(6) gives the equivalent thickness of
concrete masonry required for various fire-resistance
ratings for typical column shapes.

721.5.2 Structural
steel beams and girders. The
fire-resistance ratings of steel beams and girders shall be
based upon the size of the element and the type of protection
provided in accordance with this section.

721.5.2.1 Determination of fire resistance. These pro-
cedures establish a basis for determining resistance of
structural steel beams and girders which differ in size
from that specified in approved fire-resistance-rated
assemblies as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant
material and the weight (W) and heated perimeter (D) of
the beam or girder. As used in these sections, W is the
average weight of a structural steel member in pounds
per linear foot (plf). The heated perimeter, D, is the inside
perimeter of the fire-resistant material in inches as illus-
trated in Figure 721.5.2.

721 .5 .2 .1 .1 We igh t - to -hea ted per ime ter. The
weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D), for both
contour and box fire-resistant protection profiles, for
the wide flange shapes most often used as beams or
girders are given in Table 721.5.1(4). For different
shapes, the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D)
shall be determined in accordance with the definitions
given in this section.

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

FIGURE 721.5.2
DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER
OF STRUCTURAL STEEL BEAMS AND GIRDERS

721.5.2.1.2 Beam and girder substitutions. Except
as provided for in Section 721.5.2.2, structural steel
beams in approved fire-resistance-rated assemblies
shall be considered the minimum permissible size.
Other beam or girder shapes shall be permitted to be
substituted provided that the weight-to-heated-perim-
eter ratio (W/D) of the substitute beam is equal to or
greater than that of the beam specified in the approved
assembly.
721.5.2.2 Sprayed fire-resistant materials. The provi-
sions in this section apply to structural steel beams and
girders protected with sprayed fire-resistant materials.
Larger or smaller beam and girder shapes shall be per-
mitted to be substituted for beams specified in approved
unrestrained or restrained fire-resistance-rated assem-
blies, provided that the thickness of the fire-resistant
material is adjusted in accordance with the following
expression:

h

2

=

h W D
/

[

(

1

1

1

)

+

0 60
.

]

/

[

(

W D
/

2

)

+

0 60
.

]

2

(Equation 7-17)

where:
h = Thickness of sprayed fire-resistant material in
inches.
W = Weight of the structural steel beam or girder in
pounds per linear foot.
D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel beam in
inches.
Subscript 1 refers to the beam and fire-resistant mate-
rial thickness in the approved assembly.
Subscript 2 refers to the substitute beam or girder and
the required thickness of fire-resistant material.
The fire resistance of structural steel beams and gird-
ers protected with intumescent or mastic fire-resistant
coatings shall be determined on the basis of fire-resis-
tance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

161

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:57 PM

69

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

TABLE 721.5.1(1)
W/D RATIOS FOR STEEL COLUMNS

W14 ´ 233
´ 211
´ 193
´ 176
´ 159
´ 145
´ 132
´ 120
´ 109
´ 99
´ 90
´ 82
´ 74
´ 68
´ 61
´ 53
´ 48
´ 43

W12 ´ 190
´ 170
´ 152
´ 136
´ 120
´ 106
´ 96
´ 87
´ 79
´ 72
´ 65
´ 58
´ 53
´ 50
´ 45
´ 40

2.49
2.28
2.10
1.93
1.75
1.61
1.52
1.39
1.27
1.16
1.06
1.20
1.09
1.01
0.91
0.89
0.81
0.73

2.46
2.22
2.01
1.82
1.62
1.44
1.32
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.91
0.91
0.84
0.89
0.81
0.72

3.65
3.35
3.09
2.85
2.60
2.39
2.25
2.06
1.88
1.72
1.58
1.68
1.53
1.41
1.28
1.21
1.10
0.99

3.51
3.20
2.90
2.63
2.36
2.11
1.93
1.76
1.61
1.48
1.35
1.31
1.20
1.23
1.12
1.00

W10 ´ 112
´ 100
´ 88
´ 77
´ 68
´ 60
´ 54
´ 49
´ 45
´ 39
´ 33

W8 ´ 67
´ 58
´ 48
´ 40
´ 35
´ 31
´ 28
´ 24
´ 21
´ 18

W6 ´ 25
´ 20
´ 16
´ 15
´ 12
´ 9

W5 ´ 19
´ 16

W4 ´ 13

1.78
1.61
1.43
1.26
1.13
1.00
0.91
0.83
0.87
0.76
0.65

1.34
1.18
0.99S
0.83
0.73
0.65
0.67
0.58
0.57
0.49

0.69
0.56
0.57
0.42
0.43
0.33

0.64
0.54

0.54

2.57
2.33
2.08
1.85
1.66
1.48
1.34
1.23
1.24
1.09
0.93

1.94
1.71
1.44
1.23
1.08
0.97
0.96
0.83
0.77
0.67

1.00
0.82
0.78
0.63
0.60
0.46

0.93
0.80

0.79

For SI: 1 pound per linear foot per inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

162

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:57 PM

70

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(2)
PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE

PROPERTY

NORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETE

STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE

Thermal conductivity (kc)

Specific heat (cc)

Density (Pc)

Equilibrium (free) moisture
content (m) by volume

0.95 Btu/hr × ft × ºF

0.20 Btu/lb ºF

145 lb/ft3

4%

0.35 Btu/hr × ft × ºF

0.20 Btu/lb ºF

110 lb/ft3

5%

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 lb/ft3 = 16.0185 kg/m3, Btu/hr × ft × °F = 1.731 W/(m × K).

TABLE 721.5.1(3)
THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF CONCRETE OR CLAY
MASONRY UNITS

DENSITY (dm) OF UNITS (lb/ft3)

THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY (K) OF UNITS (Btu/hr × ft × °F)

Concrete Masonry Units

80

85

90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

120

130

0.207

0.228

0.252

0.278

0.308

0.340

0.376

0.416

0.459

0.508

0.561

0.620

0.685

0.758

0.837

1.25

2.25

Clay Masonry Units

For SI: 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.0185 kg/m3, Btu per hour × foot × °F = 1.731 W/(m × K).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

163

07_ibc_2009pg163.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Monday, March 09, 2009 9:39:38 AM

71

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(4)
WEIGHT-TO-HEATED-PERIMETER RATIOS (W/D)
FOR TYPICAL WIDE FLANGE BEAM AND GIRDER SHAPES

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

W36 ´ 300
´ 280
´ 260
´ 245
´ 230
´ 210
´ 194
´ 182
´ 170
´ 160
´ 150
´ 135

W33 ´ 241
´ 221
´ 201
´ 152
´ 141
´ 130
´ 118

W30 ´ 211
´ 191
´ 173
´ 132
´ 124
´ 116
´ 108
´ 99

W27 ´ 178
´ 161
´ 146
´ 114
´ 102
´ 94
´ 84

W24 ´ 162
´ 146
´ 131
´ 117
´ 104
´ 94
´ 84
´ 76

2.47
2.31
2.16
2.04
1.92
1.94
1.80
1.69
1.59
1.50
1.41
1.28

2.11
1.94
1.78
1.51
1.41
1.31
1.19

2.00
1.82
1.66
1.45
1.37
1.28
1.20
1.10

1.85
1.68
1.53
1.36
1.23
1.13
1.02

1.85
1.68
1.52
1.36
1.22
1.26
1.13
1.03

3.33
3.12
2.92
2.76
2.61
2.45
2.28
2.15
2.01
1.90
1.79
1.63

2.86
2.64
2.42
1.94
1.80
1.67
1.53

2.74
2.50
2.28
1.85
1.75
1.65
1.54
1.42

2.55
2.33
2.12
1.76
1.59
1.47
1.33

2.57
2.34
2.12
1.91
1.71
1.63
1.47
1.34

´ 68
´ 62
´ 55

W21 ´ 147
´ 132
´ 122
´ 111
´ 101
´ 93
´ 83
´ 73
´ 68
´ 62
´ 57
´ 50
´ 44

W18 ´ 119
´ 106
´ 97
´ 86
´ 76
´ 71
´ 65
´ 60
´ 55
´ 50
´ 46
´ 40
´ 35

W16 ´ 100
´ 89
´ 77
´ 67
´ 57
´ 50
´ 45
´ 40
´ 36
´ 31
´ 26

W14 ´ 132
´ 120
´ 109

0.92
0.92
0.82

1.83
1.66
1.54
1.41
1.29
1.38
1.24
1.10
1.03
0.94
0.93
0.83
0.73

1.69
1.52
1.39
1.24
1.11
1.21
1.11
1.03
0.95
0.87
0.86
0.75
0.66

1.56
1.40
1.22
1.07
1.07
0.94
0.85
0.76
0.69
0.65
0.55

1.83
1.67
1.53

1.21
1.14
1.02

2.60
2.35
2.19
2.01
1.84
1.80
1.62
1.44
1.35
1.23
1.17
1.04
0.92

2.42
2.18
2.01
1.80
1.60
1.59
1.47
1.36
1.26
1.15
1.09
0.96
0.85

2.25
2.03
1.78
1.56
1.43
1.26
1.15
1.03
0.93
0.83
0.70

3.00
2.75
2.52

164

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:58 PM

(continued)

72

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(4)—continued
WEIGHT-TO-HEATED-PERIMETER RATIOS (W/D)
FOR TYPICAL WIDE FLANGE BEAM AND GIRDER SHAPES

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

CONTOUR
PROFILE

BOX
PROFILE

´ 30
´ 26
´ 22
´ 19
´ 17
´ 15
´ 12

W8 ´ 67
´ 58
´ 48
´ 40
´ 35
´ 31
´ 28
´ 24
´ 21
´ 18
´ 15
´ 13
´ 10

W6 ´ 25
´ 20
´ 16
´ 15
´ 12
´ 9

W5 ´ 19
´ 16

W4 ´ 13

0.79
0.69
0.59
0.59
0.54
0.48
0.38

1.61
1.41
1.18
1.00
0.88
0.79
0.80
0.69
0.66
0.57
0.54
0.47
0.37

0.82
0.67
0.66
0.51
0.51
0.39

0.76
0.65

0.65

1.12
0.98
0.84
0.78
0.70
0.63
0.51

2.55
2.26
1.91
1.63
1.44
1.29
1.24
1.07
0.96
0.84
0.74
0.65
0.51

1.33
1.09
0.96
0.83
0.75
0.57

1.24
1.07

1.05

´ 99
´ 90
´ 82
´ 74
´ 68
´ 61
´ 53
´ 48
´ 43
´ 38
´ 34
´ 30
´ 26
´ 22

W12 ´ 87
´ 79
´ 72
´ 65
´ 58
´ 53
´ 50
´ 45
´ 40
´ 35
´ 30
´ 26
´ 22
´ 19
´ 16
´ 14

W10 ´ 112
´ 100
´ 88
´ 77
´ 68
´ 60
´ 54
´ 49
´ 45
´ 39
´ 33

1.39
1.27
1.41
1.28
1.19
1.07
1.03
0.94
0.85
0.79
0.71
0.63
0.61
0.52

1.44
1.32
1.20
1.09
1.08
0.99
1.04
0.95
0.85
0.79
0.69
0.60
0.61
0.53
0.45
0.40

2.14
1.93
1.70
1.52
1.35
1.20
1.09
0.99
1.03
0.94
0.77

2.31
2.11
2.12
1.93
1.78
1.61
1.48
1.35
1.22
1.09
0.98
0.87
0.79
0.68

2.34
2.14
1.97
1.79
1.69
1.55
1.54
1.40
1.25
1.11
0.96
0.84
0.77
0.67
0.57
0.50

3.38
3.07
2.75
2.45
2.20
1.97
1.79
1.64
1.59
1.40
1.20

For SI: Pounds per linear foot per inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

165

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:58 PM

73

166

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(5)
FIRE RESISTANCE OF CONCRETE MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

COLUMN
SIZE

CONCRETE
MASONRY DENSITY
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

COLUMN
SIZE

CONCRETE
MASONRY DENSITY
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

W14 ´ 82

80

0.74

1.61

2.36

3.04

W10 ´ 68

80

0.72

1.58

2.33

3.01

100

0.89

1.85

2.67

3.40

100

0.87

1.83

2.65

3.38

110

0.96

1.97

2.81

3.57

110

0.94

1.95

2.79

3.55

120

1.03

2.08

2.95

3.73

120

1.01

2.06

2.94

3.72

W14 ´ 68

80

0.83

1.70

2.45

3.13

W10 ´ 54

80

0.88

1.76

2.53

3.21

100

0.99

1.95

2.76

3.49

100

1.04

2.01

2.83

3.57

110

1.06

2.06

2.91

3.66

110

1.11

2.12

2.98

3.73

120

1.14

2.18

3.05

3.82

120

1.19

2.24

3.12

3.90

W14 ´ 53

80

0.91

1.81

2.58

3.27

W10 ´ 45

80

0.92

1.83

2.60

3.30

100

1.07

2.05

2.88

3.62

100

1.08

2.07

2.90

3.64

110

1.15

2.17

3.02

3.78

110

1.16

2.18

3.04

3.80

120

1.22

2.28

3.16

3.94

120

1.23

2.29

3.18

3.96

W14 ´ 43

80

1.01

1.93

2.71

3.41

W10 ´ 33

80

1.06

2.00

2.79

3.49

100

1.17

2.17

3.00

3.74

100

1.22

2.23

3.07

3.81

110

1.25

2.28

3.14

3.90

110

1.30

2.34

3.20

3.96

120

1.32

2.38

3.27

4.05

120

1.37

2.44

3.33

4.12

W12 ´ 72

80

0.81

1.66

2.41

3.09

W8 ´ 40

80

0.94

1.85

2.63

3.33

100

0.91

1.88

2.70

3.43

100

1.10

2.10

2.93

3.67

110

0.99

1.99

2.84

3.60

110

1.18

2.21

3.07

3.83

120

1.06

2.10

2.98

3.76

120

1.25

2.32

3.20

3.99

W12 ´ 58

80

0.88

1.76

2.52

3.21

W8 ´ 31

80

1.06

2.00

2.78

3.49

100

1.04

2.01

2.83

3.56

100

1.22

2.23

3.07

3.81

110

1.11

2.12

2.97

3.73

110

1.29

2.33

3.20

3.97

120

1.19

2.23

3.11

3.89

120

1.36

2.44

3.33

4.12

W12 ´ 50

80

0.91

1.81

2.58

3.27

W8 ´ 24

80

1.14

2.09

2.89

3.59

100

1.07

2.05

2.88

3.62

100

1.29

2.31

3.16

3.90

110

1.15

2.17

3.02

3.78

110

1.36

2.42

3.28

4.05

120

1.22

2.28

3.16

3.94

120

1.43

2.52

3.41

4.20

W12 ´ 40

80

1.01

1.94

2.72

3.41

W8 ´ 18

80

1.22

2.20

3.01

3.72

100

1.17

2.17

3.01

3.75

100

1.36

2.40

3.25

4.01

110

1.25

2.28

3.14

3.90

110

1.42

2.50

3.37

4.14

120

1.32

2.39

3.27

4.06

120

1.48

2.59

3.49

4.28

(continued)

74

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:31:59 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(5)—continued
FIRE RESISTANCE OF CONCRETE MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

NOMINAL TUBE
SIZE
(inches)

CONCRETE MASONRY
DENSITY, POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

4 ´ 4 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

4 ´ 4 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

4 ´ 4 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

6 ´ 6 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

6 ´ 6 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

6 ´ 6 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

8 ´ 8 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

8 ´ 8 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

8 ´ 8 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120

MINIMUM REQUIRED
EQUIVALENT THICKNESS
FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE
MASONRY PROTECTION
ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour 2-hour 3-hour 4-hour

0.93
1.08
1.16
1.22
1.05
1.20
1.27
1.34
1.21
1.35
1.41
1.48
0.82
0.98
1.05
1.12
0.96
1.12
1.19
1.26
1.14
1.29
1.36
1.42
0.77
0.92
1.00
1.07
0.91
1.07
1.14
1.21
1.10
1.25
1.32
1.39

1.90
2.13
2.24
2.34
2.03
2.25
2.35
2.45
2.20
2.40
2.50
2.59
1.75
1.99
2.10
2.21
1.91
2.14
2.25
2.35
2.11
2.32
2.43
2.52
1.66
1.91
2.02
2.14
1.84
2.08
2.19
2.29
2.06
2.28
2.38
2.48

2.71
2.99
3.13
3.26
2.84
3.11
3.24
3.37
3.01
3.26
3.38
3.50
2.54
2.84
2.98
3.11
2.71
3.00
3.13
3.26
2.92
3.18
3.30
3.43
2.44
2.75
2.89
3.03
2.63
2.92
3.06
3.19
2.86
3.13
3.25
3.38

3.43
3.76
3.91
4.06
3.57
3.88
4.02
4.17
3.73
4.02
4.16
4.30
3.25
3.59
3.75
3.91
3.42
3.75
3.90
4.05
3.63
3.93
4.08
4.22
3.13
3.49
3.66
3.82
3.33
3.67
3.83
3.98
3.57
3.87
4.02
4.17

NOMINAL PIPE
SIZE
(inches)

CONCRETE MASONRY
DENSITY, POUNDS
PER CUBIC FOOT

4 double extra
strong 0.674
wall thickness

4 extra strong
0.337 wall
thickness

4 standard
0.237 wall
thickness

5 double extra
strong 0.750
wall thickness

5 extra strong
0.375 wall
thickness

5 standard
0.258 wall
thickness

6 double extra
strong 0.864
wall thickness

6 extra strong
0.432 wall
thickness

6 standard
0.280 wall
thickness

80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120
80
100
110
120

MINIMUM REQUIRED
EQUIVALENT THICKNESS
FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE
MASONRY PROTECTION
ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour 2-hour 3-hour 4-hour

0.80
0.95
1.02
1.09
1.12
1.26
1.33
1.40
1.26
1.40
1.46
1.53
0.70
0.85
0.91
0.98
1.04
1.19
1.26
1.32
1.20
1.34
1.41
1.47
0.59
0.73
0.80
0.86
0.94
1.10
1.17
1.24
1.14
1.29
1.36
1.42

1.75
1.99
2.10
2.20
2.11
2.32
2.42
2.52
2.25
2.45
2.55
2.64
1.61
1.86
1.97
2.02
2.01
2.23
2.34
2.44
2.19
2.39
2.49
2.58
1.46
1.71
1.82
1.93
1.90
2.13
2.23
2.34
2.12
2.33
2.43
2.53

2.56
2.85
2.99
3.12
2.93
3.19
3.31
3.43
3.07
3.31
3.43
3.54
2.40
2.71
2.85
2.99
2.83
3.09
3.22
3.34
3.00
3.25
3.37
3.49
2.23
2.54
2.69
2.83
2.70
2.98
3.11
3.24
2.93
3.19
3.31
3.43

3.28
3.62
3.78
3.93
3.65
3.95
4.09
4.23
3.79
4.07
4.21
4.34
3.12
3.47
3.63
3.79
3.54
3.85
4.00
4.14
3.72
4.00
4.14
4.28
2.92
3.29
3.47
3.63
3.42
3.74
3.89
4.04
3.64
3.94
4.08
4.22

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic feet = 16.02 kg/m3.
Note: Tabulated values assume 1-inch air gap between masonry and steel section.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

167

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:00 PM

75

168

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(6)
FIRE RESISTANCE OF CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

COLUMN SIZE

CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

COLUMN SIZE

CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

W14 ´ 82

120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130

1.23
1.40
1.34
1.51
1.43
1.61
1.54
1.72
1.32
1.50
1.40
1.57
1.43
1.61
1.54
1.72

2.42
2.70
2.54
2.82
2.65
2.93
2.76
3.04
2.52
2.80
2.61
2.89
2.65
2.93
2.77
3.05

3.41
3.78
3.54
3.91
3.65
4.02
3.77
4.13
3.51
3.88
3.61
3.98
3.66
4.02
3.78
4.14

4.29
4.74
4.43
4.87
4.54
4.98
4.66
5.09
4.40
4.84
4.50
4.94
4.55
4.99
4.67
5.10

W10 ´ 68

120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130
120
130

1.27
1.44
1.40
1.58
1.44
1.62
1.59
1.77
1.47
1.65
1.59
1.77
1.66
1.84
1.75
1.93

2.46
2.75
2.61
2.89
2.66
2.95
2.82
3.10
2.70
2.98
2.82
3.10
2.90
3.18
3.00
3.27

3.26
3.83
3.62
3.98
3.67
4.04
3.84
4.20
3.71
4.08
3.84
4.20
3.92
4.28
4.01
4.37

4.35
4.80
4.51
4.95
4.57
5.01
4.73
5.13
4.61
5.04
4.73
5.17
4.82
5.25
4.91
5.34

W14 ´ 68

W10 ´ 54

W14 ´ 53

W10 ´ 45

W14 ´ 43

W10 ´ 33

W12 ´ 72

W8 ´ 40

W12 ´ 58

W8 ´ 31

W12 ´ 50

W8 ´ 24

W12 ´ 40

W8 ´ 18

STEEL TUBING

STEEL PIPE

NOMINAL TUBE
SIZE (inches)

CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

NOMINAL PIPE
SIZE (inches)

CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT

MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
1-hour
2-hour
3-hour
4-hour

4 ´ 4 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

120

1.44

2.72

3.76

4.68

4 double extra
strong 0.674
wall thickness
4 extra strong
0.337
wall thickness
4 standard
0.237
wall thickness
5 double extra
strong 0.750
wall thickness
5 extra strong
0.375
wall thickness
5 standard
0.258
wall thickness
6 double extra
strong 0.864
wall thickness
6 extra strong
0.432
wall thickness
6 standard
0.280
wall thickness

120

1.26

2.55

3.60

4.52

130

1.62

3.00

4.12

5.11

130

1.42

2.82

3.96

4.95

4 ´ 4 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

120

1.56

2.84

3.88

4.78

120

1.60

2.89

3.92

4.83

130

1.74

3.12

4.23

5.21

130

1.77

3.16

4.28

5.25

4 ´ 4 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

120

1.72

2.99

4.02

4.92

120

1.74

3.02

4.05

4.95

130

1.89

3.26

4.37

5.34

130

1.92

3.29

4.40

5.37

6 ´ 6 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

120

1.33

2.58

3.62

4.52

120

1.17

2.44

3.48

4.40

130

1.50

2.86

3.98

4.96

130

1.33

2.72

3.84

4.83

6 ´ 6 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

120

1.48

2.74

3.76

4.67

120

1.55

2.82

3.85

4.76

130

1.65

3.01

4.13

5.10

130

1.72

3.09

4.21

5.18

6 ´ 6 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

120

1.66

2.91

3.94

4.84

120

1.71

2.97

4.00

4.90

130

1.83

3.19

4.30

5.27

130

1.88

3.24

4.35

5.32

8 ´ 8 ´ 1/2 wall
thickness

120

1.27

2.50

3.52

4.42

120

1.04

2.28

3.32

4.23

130

1.44

2.78

3.89

4.86

130

1.19

2.60

3.68

4.67

8 ´ 8 ´ 3/8 wall
thickness

120

1.43

2.67

3.69

4.59

120

1.45

2.71

3.75

4.65

130

1.60

2.95

4.05

5.02

130

1.62

2.99

4.10

5.08

8 ´ 8 ´ 1/4 wall
thickness

120

1.62

2.87

3.89

4.78

120

1.65

2.91

3.94

4.84

130

1.79

3.14

4.24

5.21

130

1.82

3.19

4.30

5.27

76

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:01 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

169

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(7)
MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS
ENCASED IN NORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETEa
[FIGURE 721.5.1(6)(c)]

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1 1/2

1

2

3

4

W14 ´ 233

1

1

1 1/2

2

´ 176

1

´ 132

2 1/2

´ 90

2

´ 61

1 1/2

´ 48

3

´ 43

1 1/2

2 1/2

W12 ´ 152

1

1

2 1/2

´ 96

1

2

´ 65

´ 50

1 1/2

3

´ 40

1 1/2

2 1/2
2

W10 ´ 88

1

1 1/2

´ 49

3

´ 45

1

1 1/2

´ 39

2 1/2

3 1/2

´ 33

2

W8 ´ 67

1

1 1/2

3

´ 58

´ 48

1

2 1/2

3 1/2

´ 31

1 1/2

2

´ 21

´ 18

3

4
3 1/2

W6 ´ 25

1 1/2

2

´ 20

3

´ 16

1

2

4

´ 15

´ 9

1 1/2

2 1/2

3 1/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of nor-
mal-weight concrete given in Table 721.5.1(2).

TABLE 721.5.1(8)
MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS
ENCASED IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETEa
[FIGURE 721.5.1(6)(c)]

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (HOURS)
1 1/2

1

2

3

4

W14 ´ 233

1

1

1

1 1/2

´ 193

1 1/2

´ 74

1

2

´ 61

´ 43

1 1/2

2
1 1/2

2 1/2
2

W12 ´ 65

1

1

´ 53

1
1 1/2

´ 40

2

2 1/2
2

W10 ´ 112

1

´ 88

1

1 1/2

´ 60

1

´ 33

1 1/2

2

2 1/2
2 1/2

W8 ´ 35

1

´ 28

1

2

3

´ 24

1 1/2

´ 18

1 1/2

2 1/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of struc-
tural lightweight concrete given in Table 721.5.1(2).

77

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:01 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

170

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.5.1(9)
MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS
IN NORMAL-WEIGHT PRECAST COVERSa
[FIGURE 721.5.1(6)(a)]

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1 1/2

1

2

3

4

W14 ´ 233

1 1/2

2 1/2

3

´ 211

´ 176

3 1/2

´ 145

1 1/2

2

´ 109

1 1/2

3

´ 99

´ 61

4
4 1/2

´ 43

2

2 1/2
1 1/2

3 1/2

W12 ´ 190

2 1/2

3 1/2

´ 152

´ 120

1 1/2

2

´ 96

3

´ 87

1 1/2

4

´ 58

´ 40

2

2 1/2

3 1/2

4 1/2
3 1/2

W10 ´ 112

1 1/2

3

´ 88

1 1/2

2

4

´ 77

2

2 1/2

´ 54

3 1/2

´ 33

4 1/2

W8 ´ 67

1 1/2

2

3

4

´ 58

2 1/2

´ 48

1 1/2

2

31/2

´ 28

4 1/2

´ 21

´ 18

21/2
2

3
2 1/2

4
3 1/2

W6 ´ 25

1 1/2

´ 20

4 1/2

´ 16

3

4

´ 12

2

2 1/2

´ 9

5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of nor-
mal-weight concrete given in Table 721.5.1(2).

TABLE 721.5.1(10)
MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS
IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT PRECAST COVERSa
[FIGURE 721.5.1(6)(a)]

STRUCTURAL
SHAPE

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1 1/2

1

2

3

4

W14 ´ 233

1 1/2

1 1/2

1 1/2

2 1/2

´ 176

2

´ 145

3

´ 132

´ 109

´ 99

2

2 1/2

´ 68

´ 43

3

3 1/2
2 1/2

W12 ´ 190

2

´ 152

´ 136

1 1/2

3

´ 106

´ 96

1 1/2

1 1/2

2 1/2

´ 87

´ 65

2

´ 40

3

3 1/2

W10 ´ 112

1 1/2

1 1/2

2

´ 100

3

´ 88

´ 77

1 1/2

2 1/2

´ 60

2

3 1/2

´ 39

3

´ 33

2

W8 ´ 67

1 1/2

1 1/2

1 1/2

2 1/2

3

´ 48

2

´ 35

3

3 1/2

´ 28

´ 18

2

2 1/2
2

4
3 1/2

W6 ´ 25

1 1/2

2

3

´ 15

4

´ 9

2 1/2

3 1/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of struc-
tural lightweight concrete given in Table 721.5.1(2).

78

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:02 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

721.5.2.2.1 Minimum thickness. The use of Equa-
tion 7-17 is subject to the following conditions:
1. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio for the
substitute beam or girder (W2/D2) shall not be
less than 0.37.
2. The thickness of fire protection materials calcu-
lated for the substitute beam or girder (T1) shall
not be less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).
3. The unrestrained or restrained beam rating shall
not be less than 1 hour.
4. When used to adjust the material thickness for a
restrained beam, the use of this procedure is
limited to steel sections classified as compact in
accordance with the AISC Specification for
Structural Steel Buildings, (AISC 360-05).

721.5.2.3 Structural steel trusses. The fire resistance of
structural steel trusses protected with fire-resistant mate-
rials sprayed to each of the individual truss elements
shall be permitted to be determined in accordance with
this section. The thickness of the fire-resistant material
sh a l l b e d e t e rm in ed in a c co rd an c e w i th S e c t ion
721.5.1.3. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D)
of truss elements that can be simultaneously exposed to
fire on all sides shall be determined on the same basis as
columns, as specified in Section 721.5.1.1. The weight-
to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of truss elements that
directly support floor or roof assembly shall be deter-
mined on the same basis as beams and girders, as speci-
fied in Section 721.5.2.1.
The fire resistance of structural steel trusses protected
with intumescent or mastic fire-resistant coatings shall
be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in
accordance with Section 703.2.
721.6 Wood assemblies. The provisions of this section contain
procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of wood
assemblies are established by calculations.
721.6.1 General. This section contains procedures for cal-
culating the fire-resistance ratings of walls, floor/ceiling
and roof/ceiling assemblies based in part on the standard
method of testing referenced in Section 703.2.
721.6.1.1 Maximum fire-resistance rating. Fire resis-
tance ratings calculated for assemblies using the meth-
ods in Section 721.6 shall be limited to a maximum of 1
hour.
721.6.1.2 Dissimilar membranes. Where dissimilar
membranes are used on a wall assembly, the calculation
shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.
721.6.2 Walls, floors and roofs. These procedures apply to
both load-bearing and nonload-bearing assemblies.
721.6.2.1 Fire-resistance rating of wood frame assem-
blies. The fire-resistance rating of a wood frame assem-
bly is equal to the sum of the time assigned to the
membrane on the fire-exposed side, the time assigned to
the framing members and the time assigned for addi-
tional contribution by other protective measures such as

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

insulation. The membrane on the unexposed side shall
not be included in determining the fire resistance of the
assembly.

721 .6 .2 .2 T im e a s s ign ed to m emb ran e s . Tab l e
721.6.2(1) indicates the time assigned to membranes on
the fire-exposed side.

721.6.2.3 Exterior walls. For an exterior wall with a fire
separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), the
wall is assigned a rating dependent on the interior mem-
brane and the framing as described in Tables 721.6.2(1)
and 721.6.2(2). The membrane on the outside of the
nonfire-exposed side of exterior walls with a fire separa-
tion distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) may consist
of sheathing, sheathing paper and siding as described in
Table 721.6.2(3).

TABLE 721.6.2(1)
TIME ASSIGNED TO WALLBOARD MEMBRANESa, b, c, d

DESCRIPTION OF FINISH

TIMEe (minutes)

3/8-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue

15/32-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue

19/32-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue

3/8-inch gypsum wallboard
1/2-inch gypsum wallboard
5/8-inch gypsum wallboard
1/2-inch Type X gypsum wallboard
5/8-inch Type X gypsum wallboard
Double 3/8-inch gypsum wallboard
1/2-inch + 3/8-inch gypsum wallboard
Double 1/2-inch gypsum wallboard

5

10

15

10

15

30

25

40

25

35

40

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. These values apply only when membranes are installed on framing members
which are spaced 16 inches o.c.
b. Gypsum wallboard installed over framing or furring shall be installed so that
all edges are supported, except 5/8-inch Type X gypsum wallboard shall be
permitted to be installed horizontally with the horizontal joints staggered 24
inches each side and unsupported but finished.
c. On wood frame floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, gypsum board shall
be installed with the long dimension perpendicular to framing members and
shall have all joints finished.
d. The membrane on the unexposed side shall not be included in determining the fire
resistance of the assembly. When dissimilar membranes are used on a wall assem-
bly, the calculation shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.
e. The time assigned is not a finished rating.

721.6.2.4 Floors and roofs. In the case of a floor or roof,
the standard test provides only for testing for fire expo-
sure from below. Except as noted in Section 703.3, Item
5, floor or roof assemblies of wood framing shall have an
upper membrane consisting of a subfloor and finished
floor conforming to Table 721.6.2(4) or any other mem-
brane that has a contribution to fire resistance of at least
15 minutes in Table 721.6.2(1).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

171

07_ibc_2009pg171-172.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:46:34 AM

79

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

TABLE 721.6.2(2)
TIME ASSIGNED FOR CONTRIBUTION OF WOOD FRAME a, b, c

DESCRIPTION

Wood studs 16 inches o.c.

Wood floor and roof joists 16 inches o.c.

TIME ASSIGNED TO FRAME (minutes)

20

10

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. This table does not apply to studs or joists spaced more than 16 inches o.c.
b. All studs shall be nominal 2 × 4 and all joists shall have a nominal thickness of at least 2 inches.
c. Allowable spans for joists shall be determined in accordance with Sections 2308.8, 2308.10.2 and 2308.10.3.

TABLE 721.6.2(3)
MEMBRANEa ON EXTERIOR FACE OF WOOD STUD WALLS

SHEATHING

PAPER

EXTERIOR FINISH

5/8-inch T & G lumber

Lumber siding

5/16-inch exterior glue wood structural panel

Sheathing paper

Wood shingles and shakes

1/2-inch gypsum wallboard

5/8-inch gypsum wallboard

1/2-inch fiberboard

1/4-inch wood structural panels—exterior type

1/4-inch hardboard

Metal siding

Stucco on metal lath

Masonry veneer

Vinyl siding

None

—

3/8-inch exterior-grade wood structural panels

For SI: 1 pound/cubic foot = 16.0185 kg/m2.
a. Any combination of sheathing, paper and exterior finish is permitted.

ASSEMBLY

STRUCTURAL
MEMBERS

SUBFLOOR OR ROOF DECK

FINISHED FLOORING OR ROOFING

TABLE 721.6.2(4)
FLOORING OR ROOFING OVER WOOD FRAMINGa

Floor

Wood

15/32-inch wood structural panels or
11/16 inch T & G softwood

Hardwood or softwood flooring on building paper resilient
flooring, parquet floor felted-synthetic fiber floor coverings,
carpeting, or ceramic tile on 3/8-inch-thick panel-type underlay

Ceramic tile on 11/4-inch mortar bed

Roof

Wood

15/32-inch wood structural panels or
11/16 inch T & G softwood

Finished roofing material with or without insulation

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. This table applies only to wood joist construction. It is not applicable to wood truss construction.

TABLE 721.6.2(5)
TIME ASSIGNED FOR ADDITIONAL PROTECTION

DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL PROTECTION

FIRE RESISTANCE (minutes)

Add to the fire-resistance rating of wood stud walls if the spaces between the studs are completely filled
with glass fiber mineral wool batts weighing not less than 2 pounds per cubic foot (0.6 pound per square
foot of wall surface) or rockwool or slag material wool batts weighing not less than 3.3 pounds per cubic
foot (1 pound per square foot of wall surface), or cellulose insulation having a nominal density not less
than 2.6 pounds per cubic foot.

15

For SI: 1 pound/cubic foot = 16.0185 kg/m3.

172

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009pg171-172.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:46:34 AM

80

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

721.6.2.5 Additional protection. Table 721.6.2(5) indi-
cates the time increments to be added to the fire resis-
tance where glass fiber, rockwool, slag mineral wool or
cellulose insulation is incorporated in the assembly.
721.6.2.6 Fastening. Fastening of wood frame assemblies
and the fastening of membranes to the wood framing
members shall be done in accordance with Chapter 23.
721.6.3 Design of fire-resistant exposed wood members.
The fire-resistance rating, in minutes, of timber beams and
columns with a minimum nominal dimension of 6 inches
(152 mm) is equal to:
Beams:
2.54Zb [4 -2(b/d)] for beams which may be
exposed to fire on four sides.

(Equation 7-18)
2.54Zb [4 -(b/d)] for beams which may be
exposed to fire on three sides.
(Equation 7-19)
Columns: 2.54Zd [3 -(d/b)] for columns which may be
exposed to fire on four sides

(Equation 7-20)
2.54Zd [3 -(d/2b)] for columns which may be
exposed to fire on three sides.
(Equation 7-21)

where:
b = The breadth (width) of a beam or larger side of a
column before exposure to fire (inches).
d = The depth of a beam or smaller side of a column
before exposure to fire (inches).
Z = Load factor, based on Figure 721.6.3(1).
721.6.3.1 Equation 7-21. Equation 7-21 applies only
where the unexposed face represents the smaller side of
the column. If a column is recessed into a wall, its full
dimension shall be used for the purpose of these calcula-
tions.
721.6.3.2 Allowable loads. Allowable loads on beams
and columns are determined using design values given in
AF&PA NDS.
721.6.3.3 Fastener protection. Where minimum 1-hour
fire resistance is required, connectors and fasteners shall
be protected from fire exposure by 11/2 inches (38 mm) of
wood, or other approved covering or coating for a 1-hour
rating. Typical details for commonly used fasteners and
connectors are shown in AITC Technical Note 7.
721.6.3.4 Minimum size. Wood members are limited to
dimensions of 6 inches (152 mm) nominal or greater.
Glued-laminated timber beams utilize standard laminat-
ing combinations except that a core lamination is
removed. The tension zone is moved inward and the
equivalent of an extra nominal 2-inch-thick (51 mm)
outer tension lamination is added.

FIGURE 721.6.3(1)
LOAD FIGURE

Ke = The effective length factor as noted in Figure 721.6.3(2).
l = The unsupported length of columns (inches).

FIGURE 721.6.3(2)
EFFECTIVE LENGTH FACTORS

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

173

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:09 PM

81

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

174

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

07_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:7)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:32:09 PM

82

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 8

INTERIOR FINISHES

➡

SECTION 801
GENERAL

801.1 Scope. Provisions of this chapter shall govern the use of
materials used as interior finishes, trim and decorative materi-
als.

801.2 Interior wall and ceiling finish. The provisions of Sec-
tion 803 shall limit the allowable fire performance and smoke
development of interior wall and ceiling finish materials based
on occupancy classification.
801.3 Interior floor finish. The provisions of Section 804
shall limit the allowable fire performance of interior floor fin-
ish materials based on occupancy classification.
[F] 801.4 Decorative materials and trim. Decorative materi-
als and trim shall be restricted by combustibility and the flame
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701, in accordance
with Section 806.
801.5 Applicability. For buildings in flood hazard areas as
established in Section 1612.3, interior finishes, trim and deco-
rative materials below the design flood elevation shall be
flood-damage-resistant materials.
801.6 Application. Combustible materials shall be permitted
to be used as finish for walls, ceilings, floors and other interior
surfaces of buildings.
801.7 Windows. Show windows in the exterior walls of the
first story above grade shall be permitted to be of wood or of
unprotected metal framing.
801.8 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as inte-
rior finish except as provided in Section 803.4. Foam plastics
shall not be used as interior trim except as provided in Section
806.3 or 2604.2. This section shall apply both to exposed foam
plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile
or vinyl facing or cover.

measurements of the spread of flame versus time for a material
tested in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.
INTERIOR FINISH. Interior finish includes interior wall
and ceiling finish and interior floor finish.
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH. The exposed floor surfaces of
buildings including coverings applied over a finished floor or
stair, including risers.
[F] INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE. Interior floor finish
trim used to provide a functional and/or decorative border at the
intersection of walls and floors.
INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH. The exposed
interior surfaces of buildings, including but not limited to:
fixed or movable walls and partitions; toilet room privacy parti-
tions; columns; ceilings; and interior wainscoting, paneling or
other finish applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical
correction, surface insulation, structural fire resistance or simi-
lar purposes, but not including trim.
SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM. A system, fab-
ricated on site and intended for acoustical, tackable or aesthetic
purposes, that is comprised of three elements: (a) a frame (con-
structed of plastic, wood, metal or other material) used to hold
fabric in place, (b) a core material (infill, with the correct prop-
erties for the application), and (c) an outside layer, comprised
of a textile, fabric or vinyl, that is stretched taunt and held in
place by tension or mechanical fasteners via the frame.
SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. A comparative measure,
expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from measure-
ments of smoke obscuration versus time for a material tested in
accordance with ASTM E 84.
TRIM. Picture molds, chair rails, baseboards, handrails, door
and window frames and similar decorative or protective mate-
rials used in fixed applications.

SECTION 802
DEFINITIONS

802.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING. Wall covering
consisting of a woven textile backing, an expanded vinyl base
coat layer and a nonexpanded vinyl skin coat. The expanded
base coat layer is a homogeneous vinyl layer that contains a
blowing agent. During processing, the blowing agent decom-
poses, causing this layer to expand by forming closed cells. The
total thickness of the wall covering is approximately 0.055 inch
to 0.070 inch (1.4 mm to 1.78 mm).
FLAME SPREAD. The propagation of flame over a surface.
FLAME SPREAD INDEX . A comp a r a t ive m e a su r e ,
expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from visual

SECTION 803
WALL AND CEILING FINISHES

803.1 General. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall
be classified for fire performance and smoke development in
accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, except as shown in
Sections 803.2 through 803.13. Materials tested in accordance
with Section 803.1.2 shall not be required to be tested in accor-
dance with Section 803.1.1.
803.1.1 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials. Interior
wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified in accor-
dance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723. Such interior finish
materials shall be grouped in the following classes in accor-
dance with their
flame spread and smoke-developed
indexes.
Class A: Flame spread index 0-25; smoke-developed
index 0-450.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

175

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:11 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INTERIOR FINISHES

Class B: Flame spread index 26-75; smoke-developed
index 0-450.
Class C: Flame spread index 76-200; smoke-devel-
oped index 0-450.
Exception: Materials tested in accordance with Sec-
tion 803.1.2.
803.1.2 Room corner test for interior wall or ceiling fin-
ish materials. Interior wall or ceiling finish materials shall
be permitted to be tested in accordance with NFPA 286.
Interior wall or ceiling finish materials tested in accordance
with NFPA 286 shall comply with Section 803.1.2.1.
803.1.2.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 286. During
the 40 kW exposure, the interior finish shall comply with
Item 1. During the 160 kW exposure, the interior finish
shall comply with Item 2. During the entire test, the inte-
rior finish shall comply with Items 3 and 4.
1. During the 40kW exposure, flames shall not
spread to the ceiling.
2. During the 160 kW exposure, the interior finish
shall comply with the following:
2.1. Flame shall not spread to the outer extrem-
ity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.
2.2. Flashover, as defined in NFPA 286, shall
not occur.
3. The peak rate of heat release throughout the NFPA
286 test shall not exceed 800 kW.
4. The total smoke released throughout the NFPA
286 test shall not exceed 1,000 m2.
803.1.3 Room corner test for textile wall coverings and
expanded vinyl wall coverings. Textile wall coverings and
expanded vinyl wall coverings shall meet the criteria of Sec-
tion 803.1.3.1 when tested in the manner intended for use in
accordance with the Method B protocol of NFPA 265 using
the product-mounting system, including adhesive.
803.1.3.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 265. During
the 40 kW exposure the interior finish shall comply with
Item 1. During the 150 kW exposure, the interior finish
shall comply with Item 2. During the entire test, the inte-
rior finish shall comply with Item 3.
1. During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not
spread to the ceiling.
2. During the 150 kW exposure, the interior finish
shall comply with the following:
2.1. Flame shall not spread to the outer extremi-
ties of the samples on the 8-foot by 12-foot
(203 mm by 305 mm) walls.
2.2. Flashover, as described in NFPA 265, shall
not occur.
3. The total smoke released throughout the NFPA
265 test shall not exceed 1,000 m2.
803.1.4 Acceptance criteria for textile and expanded
vinyl wall or ceiling coverings tested to ASTM E 84 or

UL 723. Textile wall and ceiling coverings and expanded
vinyl wall and ceiling coverings shall have a Class A flame
spread index in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723 and
be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. Test speci-
men preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with
ASTM E 2404.
803.2 Thickness exemption. Materials having a thickness less
than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) applied directly to the surface of
walls or ceilings shall not be required to be tested.
803.3 Heavy timber exemption. Exposed portions of struc-
tural members complying with the requirements for buildings
of Type IV construction in Section 602.4 shall not be subject to
interior finish requirements.
803.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as inte-
rior finish except as provided in Section 2603.9. This section
shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics
used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.
803.5 Textile wall coverings. Where used as interior wall fin-
ish materials, textile wall coverings, including materials having
woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface
and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the
manner intended for use, using the product mounting system,
including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of
Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.
803.6 Textile ceiling coverings. Where used as interior ceiling
finish materials, textile ceiling coverings, including materials
having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar
surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested
in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting
system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the require-
ments of Section 803.1.2 or 803.1.4.
803.7 Expanded vinyl wall coverings. Where used as interior
wall finish materials, expanded vinyl wall coverings shall be
tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mount-
ing system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the
requirements of Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.
803.8 Expanded vinyl ceiling coverings. Where used as inte-
rior ceiling finish materials, expanded vinyl ceiling coverings
shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product
mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with
the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or 803.1.4.
803.9 Interior finish requirements based on group. Interior
wall and ceiling finish shall have a flame spread index not
greater than that specified in Table 803.9 for the group and
location designated. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials
tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meeting the accep-
tance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1, shall be permitted to be used
where a Class A classification in accordance with ASTM E 84
or UL 723 is required.
803.10 Stability. Interior finish materials regulated by this
chapter shall be applied or otherwise fastened in such a manner
that such materials will not readily become detached where
subjected to room temperatures of 200°F (93°C) for not less
than 30 minutes.

➡

176

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:12 PM

2

803.11 Application of interior finish materials to fire-resis-
tance-rated structural elements. Where interior finish mate-
rials are applied on walls, ceilings or structural elements
r e q u i r e d to h ave a f i re - re s i s ta n c e ra t in g o r to b e o f
noncombustible construction, they shall comply with the pro-
visions of this section.

803.11.1 Direct attachment and furred construction.
Where walls and ceilings are required by any provision in
this code to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible
construction, the interior finish material shall be applied
directly against such construction or to furring strips not
exceeding 13/4 inches (44 mm) applied directly against such
surfaces. The intervening spaces between such furring
strips shall comply with one of the following:

1. Be filled with material that is inorganic or non-
combustible;

2. Be filled with material that meets the requirements
of a Class A material in accordance with Section
803.1.1 or 803.1.2; or

3. Be fireblocked at a maximum of 8 feet (2438 mm)
in any direction in accordance with Section 717.

803.11.2 Set-out construction. Where walls and ceilings
are required to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible
construction and walls are set out or ceilings are dropped
distances greater than specified in Section 803.11.1, Class
A finish materials, in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or
803.1.2, shall be used except where interior finish materials
are protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, or
attached to noncombustible backing or furring strips
installed as specified in Section 803.11.1. The hangers and
assembly members of such dropped ceilings that are below

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

177

INTERIOR FINISHES

TABLE 803.9
INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH REQUIREMENTS BY OCCUPANCYk

GROUP

SPRINKLEREDl

NONSPRINKLERED

Exit enclosures and
exit passagewaysa, b

Corridors

Rooms and
enclosed spacesc

Exit enclosures and
exit passagewaysa, b

Corridors

Rooms and
enclosed spacesc

A-1 & A-2

B

B

C

A

Ad

Be

A-3f, A-4, A-5

B

B

C

A

Ad

C

B, E, M, R-1

B

C

C

A

B

C

R-4

B

C

C

A

B

B

F

C

C

C

B

C

C

H

B

B

Cg

A

A

B

I-1

B

C

C

A

B

B

I-2

B

B

Bh, i

A

A

B

I-3

A

Aj

C

A

A

B

I-4

B

B

Bh, i

A

A

B

R-2

C

C

C

B

B

C

R-3

C

C

C

C

C

C

S

C

C

C

B

B

C

U

No restrictions

No restrictions

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929m2.
a. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted for wainscotting or paneling of not more than 1,000 square feet of applied surface area in the grade lobby where
applied directly to a noncombustible base or over furring strips applied to a noncombustible base and fireblocked as required by Section 803.11.1.
b. In exit enclosures of buildings less than three stories above grade plane of other than Group I-3, Class B interior finish for nonsprinklered buildings and Class C
interior finish for sprinklered buildings shall be permitted.
c. Requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces shall be based upon spaces enclosed by partitions. Where a fire-resistance rating is required for structural elements,
the enclosing partitions shall extend from the floor to the ceiling. Partitions that do not comply with this shall be considered enclosing spaces and the rooms or
spaces on both sides shall be considered one. In determining the applicable requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces, the specific occupancy thereof shall be the
governing factor regardless of the group classification of the building or structure.
d. Lobby areas in Group A-1, A-2 and A-3 occupancies shall not be less than Class B materials.
e. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in places of assembly with an occupant load of 300 persons or less.
f. For places of religious worship, wood used for ornamental purposes, trusses, paneling or chancel furnishing shall be permitted.
g. Class B material is required where the building exceeds two stories.
h. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in administrative spaces.
i. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in rooms with a capacity of four persons or less.
j. Class B materials shall be permitted as wainscotting extending not more than 48 inches above the finished floor in corridors.
k. Finish materials as provided for in other sections of this code.
l. Applies when the exit enclosures, exit passageways, corridors or rooms and enclosed spaces are protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

3

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:13 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INTERIOR FINISHES

the main ceiling line shall be of noncombustible materials,
except that in Types III and V construction, fire-retar-
dant-treated wood shall be permitted. The construction of
each set-out wall shall be of fire-resistance-rated construc-
tion as required elsewhere in this code.
803.11.3 Heavy timber construction. Wall and ceiling fin-
ishes of all classes as permitted in this chapter that are
installed directly against the wood decking or planking of
Type IV construction or to wood furring strips applied
directly to the wood decking or planking shall be
fireblocked as specified in Section 803.11.1.
803.11.4 Materials. An interior wall or ceiling finish that is
not more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick shall be applied
directly against a noncombustible backing.
Exceptions:
1. Noncombustible materials.
2. Materials where the qualifying tests were made
with the material suspended or furred out from the
noncombustible backing.
8 0 3 . 1 2 H i g h - d e n s i t y p o l y e t hy l e n e (HD PE ) . W h e r e
high-density polyethylene is used as an interior finish, it shall
comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2.
803.13 Site-fabricated stretch systems. Where used as inte-
rior wall or interior ceiling finish materials, site-fabricated
stretch systems shall be tested in the manner intended for use,
and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.1 or
803.1.2. If the materials are tested in accordance with ASTM E
84 or UL 723, specimen preparation and mounting shall be in
accordance with ASTM E 2573.

SECTION 804
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH

804.1 General. Interior floor finish and floor covering materi-
als shall comply with Sections 804.2 through 804.4.1.
Exception: Floor finishes and coverings of a traditional
type, such as wood, vinyl, linoleum or terrazzo, and resilient
floor covering materials that are not comprised of fibers.
804.2 Classification. Interior floor finish and floor covering
materials required by Section 804.4.1 to be of Class I or II
materials shall be classified in accordance with NFPA 253. The
classification referred to herein corresponds to the classifica-
tions determined by NFPA 253 as follows: Class I, 0.45
watts/cm2 or greater; Class II, 0.22 watts/cm2 or greater.
804.3 Testing and identification. Interior floor finish and
floor covering materials shall be tested by an agency in accor-
dance with NFPA 253 and identified by a hang tag or other suit-
able method so as to identify the manufacturer or supplier and
style, and shall indicate the interior floor finish or floor cover-
ing classification according to Section 804.2. Carpet-type floor
coverings shall be tested as proposed for use, including
underlayment. Test reports confirming the information pro-
vided in the manufacturer’s product identification shall be fur-
nished to the building official upon request.
804.4 Interior floor finish requirements. In all occupancies,
interior floor finish and floor covering materials in exit enclo-

sures, exit passageways, corridors and rooms or spaces not sep-
arated from corridors by full-height partitions extending from
the floor to the underside of the ceiling shall withstand a mini-
mum critical radiant flux as specified in Section 804.4.1.
804.4.1 Minimum critical radiant flux. Interior floor fin-
ish and floor covering materials in exit enclosures, exit pas-
sageways and corridors shall not be less than Class I in
Groups I-1, I-2 and I-3 and not less than Class II in Groups
A, B, E, H, I-4, M, R-1, R-2 and S. In all areas, floor cover-
ing materials shall comply with the DOCFF-1 “pill test”
(CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1630).
Exception: Where a building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, Class II materials are per-
mitted in any area where Class I materials are required,
and materials complying with the DOC FF-1 “pill test”
(CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1630) are permitted in any area
where Class II materials are required.

SECTION 805
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS IN
TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION

805.1 Application. Combustible materials installed on or
embedded in floors of buildings of Type I or II construction
shall comply with Sections 805.1.1 through 805.1.3.
Exception: Stages and platforms constructed in accordance
with Sections 410.3 and 410.4, respectively.
805.1.1 Subfloor construction. Floor sleepers, bucks and
nailing blocks shall not be constructed of combustible mate-
rials, unless the space between the fire-resistance-rated
floor assembly and the flooring is either solidly filled with
noncombustible materials or fireblocked in accordance with
Section 717, and provided that such open spaces shall not
extend under or through permanent partitions or w alls.
805.1.2 Wood finish flooring. Wood finish flooring is per-
mitted to be attached directly to the embedded or
fireblocked wood sleepers and shall be permitted where
cemented directly to the top surface of fire-resistance-rated
floor assemblies or directly to a wood subfloor attached to
sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.
805.1.3 Insulating boards. Combustible insulating boards
not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick and covered with fin-
ish flooring are permitted where attached directly to a
noncombustible floor assembly or to wood subflooring
attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

[F] SECTION 806
DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND TRIM
[F] 806.1 General requirements. In occupancies in Groups A,
E, I and R-1 and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies,
hangings and other decorative materials suspended from walls
or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance crite-
ria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 806.2 or be
noncombustible.

178

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:13 PM

4

INTERIOR FINISHES

accordance with Section 804.2 and shall not be less than Class
II. Where a Class I floor finish is required, the floor-wall base
shall be Class I.
Exception: Interior trim materials that comply with Section
806.5.

SECTION 807
INSULATION

807.1 Insulation. Thermal and acoustical insulation shall
comply with Section 719.

SECTION 808
ACOUSTICAL CEILING SYSTEMS
808.1 Acoustical ceiling systems. The quality, design, fabrica-
tion and erection of metal suspension systems for acoustical
tile and lay-in panel ceilings in buildings or structures shall
conform with generally accepted engineering practice, the pro-
visions of this chapter and other applicable requirements of this
code.
808.1.1 Materials and installation. Acoustical materials
complying with the interior finish requirements of Section
803 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations and applicable provisions for applying
interior finish.

808.1.1.1 Suspended acoustical ceilings. Suspended
acoustical ceiling systems shall be installed in accor-
dance with the provisions of ASTM C 635 and ASTM C
636.
808.1.1.2 Fire-resistance-rated construction. Acousti-
cal ceiling systems that are part of fire-resistance-rated
construction shall be installed in the same manner used
in the assembly tested and shall comply with the provi-
sions of Chapter 7.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

In Groups I-1 and I-2, combustible decorative materials
shall meet the flame propagation criteria of NFPA 701 unless
the decorative materials, including, but not limited to, photo-
graphs and paintings, are of such limited quantities that a haz-
ard of fire development or spread is not present. In Group I-3,
combustible decorative materials are prohibited.
Fixed or movable walls and partitions, paneling, wall pads
and crash pads applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical
correction, surface insulation or other purposes shall be consid-
ered interior finish if they cover 10 percent or more of the wall
or of the ceiling area, and shall not be considered decorative
materials or furnishings.
In Group B and M occupancies, fabric partitions suspended
from the ceiling and not supported by the floor shall meet the
flame propagation performance criteria in accordance with
Section 806.2 and NFPA 701 or shall be noncombustible.
[F] 806.1.1 Noncombustible materials. The permissible
amount of noncombustible decorative material shall not be
limited.
[F] 806.1.2 Combustible decorative materials. The per-
missible amount of decorative materials meeting the flame
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 shall not
exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to
which it is attached.
Exceptions:
1. In aud itor iums in Group A , the perm iss ib le
amount of decorative material meeting the flame
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701
shall not exceed 75 percent of the aggregate wall
area where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 and where the material is
installed in accordance with Section 803.11.
2. The amount of fabric partitions suspended from
the ceiling and not supported by the floor in Group
B and M occupancies shall not be limited.
[F] 806.2 Acceptance criteria and reports. Where required
by Section 806.1, decorative materials shall be tested by an
agency and meet the flame propagation performance criteria of
NFPA 701 or such materials shall be noncombustible. Reports
of test results shall be prepared in accordance with NFPA 701
and furnished to the building official upon request.
[F] 806.3 Foam plastic. Foam plastic used as trim in any occu-
pancy shall comply with Section 2604.2.
[F] 806.4 Pyroxylin plastic. Imitation leather or other material
consisting of or coated with a pyroxylin or similarly hazardous
base shall not be used in Group A occupancies.
[F] 806.5 Interior trim. Material, other than foam plastic used
as interior trim, shall have a minimum Class C flame spread
and smoke-developed index when tested in accordance with
ASTM E 84 or UL 723, as described in Section 803.1.1. Com-
bustible trim, excluding handrails and guardrails, shall not
exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area in which it
is attached.
[F] 806.6 Interior floor-wall base. Interior floor-wall base
that is 6 inches (152 mm) or less in height shall be tested in

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

179

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:14 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

180

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

08_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)8_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 1:34:14 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 9

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

SECTION 901
GENERAL

901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall specify where
fire protection systems are required and shall apply to the
design, installation and operation of fire protection systems.
901.2 Fire protection systems. Fire protection systems shall
be installed, repaired, operated and maintained in accordance
with this code and the International Fire Code.
Any fire protection system for which an exception or reduc-
tion to the provisions of this code has been granted shall be con-
sidered to be a required system.
Exception: Any fire protection system or portion thereof
not required by this code shall be permitted to be installed
for partial or complete protection provided that such system
meets the requirements of this code.
901.3 Modifications. No person shall remove or modify any
fire protection system installed or maintained under the provi-
sions of this code or the International Fire Code without
approval by the building official.
901.4 Threads. Threads provided for fire department connec-
tions to sprinkler systems, standpipes, yard hydrants or any
other fire hose connection shall be compatible with the connec-
tions used by the local fire department.
901.5 Acceptance tests. Fire protection systems shall be tested
in accordance with the requirements of this code and the Inter-
national Fire Code. When required, the tests shall be con-
ducted in the presence of the building official. Tests required by
this code, the International Fire Code and the standards listed
in this code shall be conducted at the expense of the owner or
the owner’s representative. It shall be unlawful to occupy por-
tions of a structure until the required fire protection systems
within that portion of the structure have been tested and
approved.
901.6 Supervisory service. Where required, fire protection
systems shall be monitored by an supervising station in accor-
dance with NFPA 72.
901.6.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprin-
kler systems shall be monitored by an approved supervising
station.
Exceptions:
1. A supervising station is not required for automatic
sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family
dwellings.
2. Limited area systems serving fewer than 20 sprin-
klers.
901.6.2 Fire alarm systems. Fire alarm systems required
by the provisions of Section 907.2 of this code and Sections
907.2 and 907.3 of the International Fire Code shall be

monitored by an approved supervising station in accor-
dance with Section 907.6.5.
Exceptions:
1. S in g l e - an d m u l t ip l e - s t a t io n smo k e a l a rm s
required by Section 907.2.11.
2. Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.
3. Supervisory service is not required for automatic
sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwell-
ings.
901.6.3 Group H. Manual fire alarm, automatic fire-extin-
guishing and emergency alarm systems in Group H occu-
pancies shall be monitored by an approved supervising
station.
Exception: When approved by the building official,
on-site monitoring at a constantly attended location shall
be permitted provided that notifications to the fire
department will be equal to those provided by an
approved supervising station.
901.7 Fire areas. Where buildings, or portions thereof, are
divided into fire areas so as not to exceed the limits established
for requiring a fire protection system in accordance with this
chapter, such fire areas shall be separated by fire barriers con-
structed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assem-
blies constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both,
having a fire-resistance rating of not less than that determined
in accordance with Section 707.3.9.

SECTION 902
DEFINITIONS

902.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
[F] ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A fire alarm
system component such as a bell, horn, speaker, light or text
display that provides audible, tactile or visible outputs, or any
combination thereof.
[F] ALARM SIGNAL. A signal indicating an emergency
requiring immediate action, such as a signal indicative of fire.
[F] ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. A feature of
automatic fire detection and alarm systems to reduce unwanted
alarms wherein smoke detectors report alarm conditions for a
minimum period of time, or confirm alarm conditions within a
given time period, after being automatically reset, in order to be
accepted as a valid alarm-initiation signal.
[F] ANNUNCIATOR. A unit containing one or more indica-
tor lamps, alphanumeric displays or other equivalent means in
which each indication provides status information about a cir-
cuit, condition or location.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

181

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:17 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A
notification appliance that alerts by the sense of hearing.
[F] AUTOMATIC. As applied to fire protection devices, a
device or system providing an emergency function without the
necessity for human intervention and activated as a result of a
predetermined temperature rise, rate of temperature rise or
combustion products.
[F] AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.
An approved system of devices and equipment which automat-
ically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguish-
ing agent onto or in the area of a fire.
[F] AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. A fire
alarm system that has initiation devices that utilize smoke
detectors for protection of an area such as a room or space with
detectors to provide early warning of fire.
[F] AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. An automatic
sprinkler system, for fire protection purposes, is an integrated
system of underground and overhead piping designed in accor-
dance with fire protection engineering standards. The system
includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the system
above the ground is a network of specially sized or hydrauli-
cally designed piping installed in a structure or area, generally
overhead, and to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a
systematic pattern. The system is usually activated by heat
from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.
[F] AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The root mean
square, A-weighted sound pressure level measured over a
24-hour period, or the time any person is present, whichever
time period is less.
[F] CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.
A system supplying carbon dioxide (CO2) from a pressurized
vessel through fixed pipes and nozzles. The system includes a
manual- or automatic-actuating mechanism.
[F] CEILING LIMIT. The maximum concentration of an
air-borne contaminant to which one may be exposed, as pub-
lished in DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000.
[F] CLEAN AGENT. Electrically nonconducting, volatile or
gaseous fire extinguishant that does not leave a residue upon
evaporation.
[F] CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. A desig-
nated location at a facility staffed by trained personnel on a
continuous basis where alarm or supervisory signals are moni-
tored and facilities are provided for notification of the fire
department or other emergency services.
[F] DELUGE SYSTEM. A sprinkler system employing open
sprinklers attached to a piping system connected to a water sup-
ply through a valve that is opened by the operation of a detec-
tion system installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When
this valve opens, water flows into the piping system and dis-
charges from all sprinklers attached thereto.
[F] DETECTOR, HEAT. A fire detector that senses heat—
either abnormally high temperature or rate of rise, or both.
[F] DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. A
powder composed of small particles, usually of sodium bicar-
bonate, potassium bicarbonate, urea-potassium-based bicar-

bonate, potassium chloride or monoammonium phosphate,
with added particulate material supplemented by special treat-
ment to provide resistance to packing, resistance to moisture
absorption (caking) and the proper flow capabilities.

[F] ELEVATOR GROUP. A grouping of elevators in a build-
ing located adjacent or directly across from one another that
responds to a common hall call button(s).

[F] EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. A system to provide
indication and warning of emergency situations involving haz-
ardous materials.

[F] EMERGENCY VOICE /ALARM COMMUNICA-
TIONS. Dedicated manual or automatic facilities for originat-
ing and distributing voice instructions, as well as alert and
evacuation signals pertaining to a fire emergency, to the occu-
pants of a building.

[F] FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. See “Manual fire alarm
box.”

[F] FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. A system component
that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm
devices and may be capable of supplying power to detection
devices and transponder(s) or off-premises transmitter(s). The
control unit may be capable of providing a transfer of power to
the notification appliances and transfer of condition to relays or
devices.

[F] FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. A signal initiated by a fire
alarm-initiating device such as a manual fire alarm box, auto-
matic fire detector, waterflow switch or other device whose
activation is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature.

[F] FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system or portion of a com-
b ina tion sys tem cons is ting of componen ts and c ircu its
arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or
supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appro-
priate response to those signals.

[F] FIRE AREA. The aggregate floor area enclosed and
bounded by fire walls, fire barriers, exterior walls or horizon-
tal assemblies of a building. Areas of the building not provided
with surrounding walls shall be included in the fire area if such
areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof
or floor next above.

[F] FIRE COMMAND CENTER. The principal attended or
unattended location where the status of detection, alarm com-
munications and control systems is displayed, and from which
the system(s) can be manually controlled.

[F] FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. A device designed
to detect the presence of a fire signature and to initiate action.

[F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. Approved devices,
equipment and systems or combinations of systems used to
detect a fire, activate an alarm, extinguish or control a fire, con-
trol or manage smoke and products of a fire or any combination
thereof.

[F] FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. Building and fire control
functions that are intended to increase the level of life safety for
occupants or to control the spread of harmful effects of fire.

182

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:17 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A special system
discharging a foam made from concentrates, either mechani-
cally or chemically, over the area to be protected.
[F] HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A
fire-extinguishing system using one or more atoms of an ele-
ment from the halogen chemical series: fluorine, chlorine, bro-
mine and iodine.
[F] INITIATING DEVICE. A system component that origi-
nates transmission of a change-of-state condition, such as in a
smoke detector, manual fire alarm box or supervisory switch.
[F] MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. A manually operated
device used to initiate an alarm signal.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. Two or
more single-station alarm devices that are capable of intercon-
nection such that actuation of one causes all integral or separate
audible alarms to operate. It also can consist of one single-sta-
tion alarm device having connections to other detectors or to a
manual fire alarm box.
[F] MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. Two or more
single-station alarm devices that are capable of interconnection
such that actuation of one causes the appropriate alarm signal
to operate in all interconnected alarms.
[F] NOTIFICATION ZONE. See “Zone, notification.”
[F] NUISANCE ALARM. An alarm caused by mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or lack of proper
maintenance, or an alarm activated by a cause that cannot be
determined.
[F] RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings (“as builts”) that doc-
um en t th e lo ca t ion o f a l l d ev ice s , app l ian ce s , w i r ing
sequences, wiring methods and connections of the components
of a fire alarm system as installed.
[F] SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. An assembly
incorporating the detector, the control equipment and the
alarm-sounding device in one unit, operated from a power sup-
ply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation.
[F] SMOKE ALARM. A single- or multiple-station alarm
responsive to smoke.
[F] SMOKE DETECTOR. A listed device that senses visible
or invisible particles of combustion.
SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE. An exit stairway designed
and constructed so that the movement of the products of com-
bustion produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building
into the enclosure is limited.
[F] STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. Standpipe
classes are as follows:
Class I system. A system providing 21/2-inch (64 mm) hose
connections to supply water for use by fire departments and
those trained in handling heavy fire streams.
Class II system. A system providing 11/2-inch (38 mm)
hose stations to supply water for use primarily by the build-
ing occupants or by the fire department during initial
response.
Class III system. A system providing 11/2-inch (38 mm)
hose stations to supply water for use by building occupants

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

and 21/2-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply a larger
volume of water for use by fire departments and those
trained in handling heavy fire streams.

[F] STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. Standpipe types are as follows:

Automatic dry. A dry standpipe system, normally filled
with pressurized air, that is arranged through the use of a
device, such as dry pipe valve, to admit water into the sys-
tem piping automatically upon the opening of a hose valve.
The water supply for an automatic dry standpipe system
shall be capable of supplying the system demand.

Automatic wet. A wet standpipe system that has a water
supply that is capable of supplying the system demand auto-
matically.

Manual dry. A dry standpipe system that does not have a
permanent water supply attached to the system. Manual dry
standpipe systems require water from a fire department
pumper to be pumped into the system through the fire
department connection in order to meet the system demand.

Manual wet. A wet standpipe system connected to a water
supply for the purpose of maintaining water within the sys-
tem but does not have a water supply capable of delivering
the system demand attached to the system. Manual-wet
standpipe systems require water from a fire department
pumper (or the like) to be pumped into the system in order to
meet the system demand.

Semiautomatic dry. A dry standpipe system that
is
arranged through the use of a device, such as a deluge valve,
to admit water into the system piping upon activation of a
remote control device located at a hose connection. A
remote control activation device shall be provided at each
hose connection. The water supply for a semiautomatic dry
standpipe system shall be capable of supplying the system
demand.

[F] SUPERVISING STATION. A facility that receives sig-
nals and at which personnel are in attendance at all times to
respond to these signals.

[F] SUPERVISORY SERVICE. The service required to
monitor performance of guard tours and the operative condi-
tion of fixed suppression systems or other systems for the pro-
tection of life and property.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. A signal indicating the need
of action in connection with the supervision of guard tours, the
fire suppression systems or equipment or the maintenance fea-
tures of related systems.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE. An
in i t ia t ion dev ice , such a s a va lve supe rv i so ry sw i tch ,
water-level indicator or low-air pressure switch on a dry-pipe
sprinkler system, whose change of state signals an off-normal
condition and its restoration to normal of a fire protection or
life safety system, or a need for action in connection with guard
tours, fire suppression systems or equipment or maintenance
features of related systems.

[F] TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. Storage of tires where the
area available for storage exceeds 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

183

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:18 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] TROUBLE SIGNAL. A signal initiated by the fire alarm
system or device indicative of a fault in a monitored circuit or
component.

[F] VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A
notification appliance that alerts by the sense of sight.

[F] WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A
solution of water and potassium-carbonate-based chemical,
potassium-acetate-based chemical or a combination thereof,
forming an extinguishing agent.

[F] WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. A system or a
part of a system that can transmit and receive signals without
the aid of wire.

[F] ZONE. A defined area within the protected premises. A
zone can define an area from which a signal can be received, an
area to which a signal can be sent or an area in which a form of
control can be executed.

[F] ZONE, NOTIFICATION. An area within a building or
facility covered by notification appliances which are activated
simultaneously.

SECTION 903
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS

[F] 903.1 General. Automatic sprinkler systems shall comply
with this section.

[F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic
fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904
shall be permitted in lieu of automatic sprinkler protection
where recognized by the applicable standard and approved
by the fire code official.

[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler sys-
tems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the
locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.

Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications build-
ings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment,
associated electrical power distribution equipment, batter-
ies and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are
equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection
system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated
from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in
accordance with Section 712, or both.

[F] 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used
as Group A occupancies as provided in this section. For
Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies, the automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the floor area
where the Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancy is
located, and in all floors from the Group A occupancy to,
and including, the nearest level of exit discharge serving the
Group A occupancy. For Group A-5 occupancies, the auto-
matic sprinkler system shall be provided in the spaces indi-
cated in Section 903.2.1.5.

184

[F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where
one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115
m2);
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more;
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level
of exit discharge serving such occupancies; or
4. The fire area contains a multitheater complex.
[F] 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies where
one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464.5
m2);
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more;
or
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level
of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
[F] 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies where
one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115
m2);
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more;
or
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level
of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
[F] 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies where
one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115
m2);
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more;
or
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level
of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
[F] 903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the
following areas: concession stands, retail areas, press
boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000
square feet (93 m2).

[F] 903.2.2 Group B ambulatory health care facilities.
An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
all fire areas containing a Group B ambulatory health care
facility occupancy when either of the following conditions
exists at any time:
1. Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-
preservation.
2. One or more care recipients who are incapable of self-
preservation are located at other than the level of exit
discharge serving such an occupancy.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:18 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided for Group E occupancies as follows:
1. Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than
12,000 square feet (1115 m2) in area.
2. Throughout every portion of educational buildings
below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that
portion of the building.
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not
required in any area below the lowest level of exit
discharge serving that area where every classroom
throughout the building has at least one exterior
exit door at ground level.
[F] 903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a
Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following condi-
tions exists:
1. A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet
(1115 m2).
2. A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three sto-
ries above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000
square feet (2230 m2).
[F] 903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group
F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking
operations in excess of 2,500 square feet (232 m2) in area
which generate finely divided combustible waste or use
finely divided combustible materials.
[F] 903.2.5 Group H. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
provided in high-hazard occupancies as required in Sec-
tions 903.2.5.1 through 903.2.5.3.
[F] 903.2.5.1 General. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed in Group H occupancies.
[F] 903.2.5.2 Group H-5. An automatic sprinkler sys-
tem shall be installed throughout buildings containing
Group H-5 occupancies. The design of the sprinkler sys-
tem shall not be less than that required by this code for
the occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with
Table 903.2.5.2. Where the design area of the sprinkler
system consists of a corridor protected by one row of
sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required
to be calculated is 13.

[F] TABLE 903.2.5.2
GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA

LOCATION

OCCUPANCY HAZARD
CLASSIFICATION

Fabrication areas

Ordinary Hazard Group 2

Service corridors

Ordinary Hazard Group 2

Storage rooms without dispensing

Ordinary Hazard Group 2

Storage rooms with dispensing

Extra Hazard Group 2

Corridors

Ordinary Hazard Group 2

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin plastics. An automatic sprin-
kler system shall be provided in buildings, or portions
thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics
are manufactured , stored or hand led in quan tities
exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg).
[F] 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.
Exception: An automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3 shall be
allowed in Group I-1 facilities.
[F] 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M
occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
1. A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet
(1115 m2).
2. A Group M fire area is located more than three stories
above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000
square feet (2230 m2).
4. A Group M occupancy is used for the display and sale
of upholstered furniture.
[F] 903.2.7.1 High-piled storage. An automatic sprin-
kler system shall be provided in accordance with the
International Fire Code in all buildings of Group M
where storage of merchandise is in high-piled or rack
storage arrays.
[F] 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided
throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.
[F] 903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group
S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions
exists:
1. A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet
(1115 m2).
2. A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three sto-
ries above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all
floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000
square feet (2230 m2).
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of com-
mercial trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds
5,000 square feet (464 m2).
[F] 903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler
system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as
repair garages in accordance with Section 406, as shown:
1. Buildings having two or more stories above grade
plane, including basements, with a fire area con-
taining a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square
feet (929 m2).
2. Buildings no more than one story above grade
plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage
exceeding 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

185

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:19 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

3. Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles
parked in basements.
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of com-
mercial trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds
5,000 square feet (464 m2).
[F] 903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and struc-
tures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds
20,000 cubic feet (566 m3) shall be equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1.
[F] 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An
automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accor-
dance with Section 406.4 as follows:
1. Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage
exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2); or
2. Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath
other groups.
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located
beneath Group R-3 occupancies.
[F] 903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages. An auto-
matic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout
buildings used for storage of commercial trucks or buses
where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).
[F] 903.2.11 Specific building areas and hazards. In all
occupancies an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
for building design or hazards in the locations set forth in
Sections 903.2.11.1 through 903.2.11.6.
Exception: Groups R-3 and U.
[F] 903.2.11.1 Stories without openings. An automatic
sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all stories,
including basements, of all buildings where the floor
area exceeds 1,500 square feet (139.4 m2) and where
there is not provided at least one of the following types of
exterior wall openings:
1. Openings below grade that lead directly to ground
level by an exterior stairway complying with Sec-
tion 1009 or an outside ramp complying with Sec-
tion 1010. Openings shall be located in each 50
linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction thereof, of
exterior wall in the story on at least one side. The
required openings shall be distributed such that the
lineal distance between adjacent openings does
not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).
2. Openings entirely above the adjoining ground
level totaling at least 20 square feet (1.86 m2) in
each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction
thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one
side. The required openings shall be distributed
such that the lineal distance between adjacent
openings does not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).
[F] 903.2.11.1.1 Opening dimensions and access.
Openings shall have a minimum dimension of not less
than 30 inches (762 mm). Such openings shall be
accessible to the fire department from the exterior and

shall not be obstructed in a manner that fire fighting or
rescue cannot be accomplished from the exterior.
[F] 903.2.11.1.2 Openings on one side only. Where
openings in a story are provided on only one side and
the opposite wall of such story is more than 75 feet (22
860 mm) from such openings, the story shall be
equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, or openings as specified above shall
be provided on at least two sides of the story.
[F] 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a
basement is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm)
from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, the
basement shall be equipped throughout with an
approved automatic sprinkler system.

[F] 903.2.11.2 Rubbish and linen chutes. An automatic
sprinkler system shall be installed at the top of rubbish
and linen chutes and in their terminal rooms. Chutes
extending through three or more floors shall have addi-
tional sprinkler heads installed within such chutes at
alternate floors. Chute sprinklers shall be accessible for
servicing.
[F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 feet or more in height. An
automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout
buildings with a floor level having an occupant load of
30 or more that is located 55 feet (16 764 mm) or more
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Exceptions:
1. Airport control towers.
2. Open parking structures.
3. Occupancies in Group F-2.
[F] 903.2.11.4 Ducts conveying hazardous exhausts.

Where required by the International Mechanical Code,
automatic sprinklers shall be provided in ducts convey-
ing hazardous exhaust, or flammable or combustible
materials.
Exception: Ducts in which the largest cross-sectional
diameter of the duct is less than 10 inches (254 mm).
[F] 903.2.11.5 Commercial cooking operations. An
automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in commer-
cial kitchen exhaust hood and duct system where an
automatic sprinkler system is used to comply with Sec-
tion 904.
[F] 903.2.11.6 Other required suppression systems. In
addition to the requirements of Section 903.2, the provi-
sions indicated in Table 903.2.11.6 also require the
installation of a fire suppression system for certain build-
ings and areas.
[F] 903.2.12 During construction. Automatic sprinkler
systems required during construction, alteration and demo-
lition operations shall be provided in accordance with Chap-
ter 14 of the International Fire Code.

[F] 903.3 Installation requirements. Automatic sprinkler sys-
tems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sec-
tions 903.3.1 through 903.3. 6.

186

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg186.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 10:52:05 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] TABLE 903.2.11.6
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS

SECTION

402.9

Covered malls

SUBJECT

403.2, 403.3

High-rise buildings

404.3

405.3

407.5

410.6

411.4

Atriums

Underground structures

Group I-2

Stages

Special amusement buildings

412.4.6, 412.4.6.1,
412.6.5

Aircraft hangars

415.6.2.4

Group H-2

416.4

417.4

507

Flammable finishes

Drying rooms

Unlimited area buildings

508.2.5

Incidental accessory occupancies

1028.6.2.3

Smoke-protected assembly seating

IFC

Sprinkler system requirements as set forth in
Section 903.2.11.6 of the International Fire
Code

[F] 903.3.1 Standards. Sprinkler systems shall be designed
and installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1,
903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3.
[F] 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Where the
provisions of this code require that a building or portion
thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers
shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA
13 except as provided in Section 903.3.1.1.1.
[F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. Automatic sprin-
klers shall not be required in the following rooms or
areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an
approved automatic fire detection system in accor-
dance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible
or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall
not be omitted from any room merely because it is
damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or con-
tains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or
flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire
hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are consid-
ered undesirable because of the nature of the
contents, when approved by the fire code offi-
cial.
3. Generator and transformer rooms separated
from the remainder of the building by walls and
floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having
a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

4. Rooms or areas that are of noncombustible con-
struction with wholly noncombustible con-
tents.
5. Fire service access elevator machine rooms and
machinery spaces.
[F] 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Where
allowed in buildings of Group R, up to and including four
stories in height, automatic sprinkler systems shall be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R.
[F] 903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler pro-
tection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks
and ground floor patios of dwelling units where the
building is of Type V construction, provided there is a
roof or deck above. Sidewall sprinklers that are used
to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located
such that their deflectors are within 1 inch (25 mm) to
6 inches (152 mm) below the structural members and
a maximum distance of 14 inches (356 mm) below the
deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are con-
structed of open wood joist construction.
[F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Where

allowed, automatic sprinkler systems installed in one-
and two-family dwellings and townhouses shall be
installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D.
[F] 903.3.2 Quick-response and residential sprinklers.
Where automatic sprinkler systems are required by this
code, quick-response or residential automatic sprinklers
shall be installed in the following areas in accordance with
Section 903.3.1 and their listings:
1. Throughout all spaces within a smoke compartment
containing patient sleeping units in Group I-2 in
accordance with this code.
2. Dwelling units, and sleeping units in Group R and I-1
occupancies.
3. Light-hazard occupancies as defined in NFPA 13.
[F] 903.3.3 Obstructed locations. Automatic sprinklers
shall be installed with due regard to obstructions that will
delay activation or obstruct the water distribution pattern.
Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in or under covered
kiosks, displays, booths, concession stands, or equipment
that exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm) in width. Not less than a 3-foot
(914 mm) clearance shall be maintained between automatic
sprinklers and the top of piles of combustible fibers.
Exception: Kitchen equipment under exhaust hoods
protected with a fire-extinguishing system in accordance
with Section 904.
[F] 903.3.4 Actuation. Automatic sprinkler systems shall
be automatically actuated unless specifically provided for in
this code.
[F] 903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic
sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the
standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water
supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance
with the requirements of this section and the International
Plumbing Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

187

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:20 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 903.3.5.1 Domestic services. Where the domestic
service provides the water supply for the automatic
sprinkler system, the supply shall be in accordance with
this section.

[F] 903.3.5.1.1 Limited area sprinkler systems.
Limited area sprinkler systems serving fewer than 20
sprinklers on any single connection are permitted to
be connected to the domestic service where a wet
automatic standpipe is not available. Limited area
sprinkler systems connected to domestic water sup-
plies shall comply with each of the following require-
ments:
1. Valves shall not be installed between the
domestic water riser control valve and the
sprinklers.
Exception: An approved indicating control
valve supervised in the open position in
accordance with Section 903.4.
2. The domestic service shall be capable of sup-
plying the simultaneous domestic demand and
the sprinkler demand required to be hydrauli-
cally calculated by NFPA 13, NFPA 13R or
NFPA 13D.
[F] 903.3.5.1.2 Residential combination services. A
single combination water supply shall be allowed pro-
vided that the domestic demand is added to the sprin-
kler demand as required by NFPA 13R.

[F] 903.3.5.2 Secondary water supply. A secondary
on-site water supply equal to the hydraulically calculated
sprinkler demand, including the hose stream require-
ment, shall be provided for high-rise buildings assigned
to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F as determined
by this code. The secondary water supply shall have a
duration of not less than 30 minutes as determined by the
occupancy hazard classification in accordance with
NFPA 13.

Exception: Existing buildings.

[F] 903.3.6 Hose threads. Fire hose threads and fittings
used in connection with automatic sprinkler systems shall
be as prescribed by the fire code official.

[F] 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. All
valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler sys-
tems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air
pressures and waterflow switches on all sprinkler systems shall
be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit.

Exceptions:

1. Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and
two-family dwellings.
2. Limited area systems serving fewer than 20 sprin-
klers.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance
with NFPA 13R where a common supply main is used
to supply both domestic water and the automatic

sprinkler system, and a separate shutoff valve for the
automatic sprinkler system is not provided.
4. Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked
in the open position.
5. Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint
spray booths or dip tanks that are sealed or locked in
the open position.
6. Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump
engines that are sealed or locked in the open position.
7. Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, preaction and
deluge sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in
the open position.
[F] 903.4.1 Monitoring. Alarm, supervisory and trouble
signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automati-
cally transmitted to an approved supervising station or,
when approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audi-
ble signal at a constantly attended location.

Exceptions:
1. Underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes
provided by the municipality or public utility are
not required to be monitored.
2. Backflow prevention device test valves located in
limited area sprinkler system supply piping shall
be locked in the open position. In occupancies
required to be equipped with a fire alarm system,
the backflow preventer valves shall be electrically
supervised by a tamper switch installed in accor-
dance with NFPA 72 and separately annunciated.
[F] 903.4.2 Alarms. Approved audible devices shall be con-
nected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler
waterflow alarm devices shall be activated by waterflow
equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest
orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be
provided on the exterior of the building in an approved loca-
tion. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire
alarm system.
[F] 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised
indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of
connection to the riser on each floor in high-rise buildings.
[F] 903.5 Testing and maintenance. Sprinkler systems shall
be tested and maintained in accordance with the International
Fire Code.

SECTION 904
ALTERNATIVE AUTOMATIC
FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS

[F] 904.1 General. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems,
other than automatic sprinkler systems, shall be designed,
installed, inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this section and the applicable referenced
standards.
[F] 904.2 Where required. Automatic fire-extinguishing sys-
tems installed as an alternative to the required automatic sprin-

188

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg188.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:05:59 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

kler systems of Section 903 shall be approved by the fire code
official. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall not be con-
sidered alternatives for the purposes of exceptions or reduc-
tions allowed by other requirements of this code.
[F] 904.2.1 Commercial hood and duct systems. Each
required commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct system
required by Section 609 of the International Fire Code or
Chapter 5 of the International Mechanical Code to have a
Type I hood shall be protected with an approved automatic
fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with this
code.
[F] 904.3 Installation. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems
shall be installed in accordance with this section.
[F] 904.3.1 Electrical wiring. Electrical wiring shall be in
accordance with NFPA 70.
[F] 904.3.2 Actuation. Automatic fire-extinguishing sys-
tems shall be automatically actuated and provided with a
manual means of actuation in accordance with Section
904.11.1.
[F] 904.3.3 System interlocking. Automatic equipment
interlocks with fuel shutoffs, ventilation controls, door
closers, window shutters, conveyor openings, smoke and
heat vents and other features necessary for proper operation
of the fire-extinguishing system shall be provided as
required by the design and installation standard utilized for
the hazard.
[F] 904.3.4 Alarms and warning signs. Where alarms are
required to indicate the operation of automatic fire-extin-
guishing systems, distinctive audible and visible alarms and
warning signs shall be provided to warn of pending agent
discharge. Where exposure to automatic-extinguishing
agents poses a hazard to persons and a delay is required to
ensure the evacuation of occupants before agent discharge,
a separate warning signal shall be provided to alert occu-
pants once agent discharge has begun. Audible signals shall
be in accordance with Section 907.6.2.
[F] 904.3.5 Monitoring. Where a building fire alarm sys-
tem is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall
be monitored by the building fire alarm system in accor-
dance with NFPA 72.
[F] 904.4 Inspection and testing. Automatic fire-extinguish-
ing systems shall be inspected and tested in accordance with
the provisions of this section prior to acceptance.
[F] 904.4.1 Inspection. Prior to conducting final accep-
tance tests, the following items shall be inspected:
1. Hazard specification for consistency with design haz-
ard.
2. Type, location and spacing of automatic- and man-
ual-initiating devices.
3. Size, placement and position of nozzles or discharge
orifices.
4. Location and identification of audible and visible
alarm devices.
5. Identification of devices with proper designations.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

6. Operating instructions.
[F] 904.4.2 Alarm testing. Notification appliances, con-
nections to fire alarm systems and connections to approved
supervising stations shall be tested in accordance with this
section and Section 907 to verify proper operation.
[F] 904.4.2.1 Audible and visible signals. The audibil-
ity and visibility of notification appliances signaling
agent discharge or system operation, where required,
shall be verified.
[F] 904.4.3 Monitor testing. Connections to protected pre-
mises and supervising station fire alarm systems shall be
tested to verify proper identification and retransmission of
alarms from automatic fire-extinguishing systems.
[F] 904.5 Wet-chemical systems. Wet-chemical extinguish-
ing systems shall be installed , maintained , periodically
inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 17A and their
listing.
[F] 904.6 Dry-chemical systems. Dry-chemical extinguishing
systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected
and tested in accordance with NFPA 17 and their listing.
[F] 904.7 Foam systems. Foam-extinguishing systems shall be
installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in
accordance with NFPA 11 and NFPA 16 and their listing.
[F] 904.8 Carbon dioxide systems. Carbon dioxide extin-
guishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically
inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 12 and their list-
ing.
[F] 904.9 Halon systems. Halogenated extinguishing systems
shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested
in accordance with NFPA 12A and their listing.
[F] 904.10 Clean-agent systems. Clean-agent fire-extinguish-
ing systems shall be installed , maintained , periodically
inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 2001 and their
listing.
[F] 904.11 Commercial cooking systems. The automatic
fire-extinguishing system for commercial cooking systems
shall be of a type recognized for protection of commercial
cooking equipment and exhaust systems of the type and
arrangement protected. Preengineered automatic dry- and
wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be tested in accor-
dance with UL 300 and listed and labeled for the intended
application. Other types of automatic fire-extinguishing sys-
tems shall be listed and labeled for specific use as protection
for commercial cooking operations. The system shall be
installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manu-
facturer’s installation instructions. Automatic fire-extinguish-
ing systems of the following types shall be installed in
accordance with the referenced standard indicated, as follows:
1. Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, NFPA 12.
2. Automatic sprinkler systems, NFPA 13.
3. Foam-water sprinkler system or foam-water spray sys-
tems, NFPA 16.
4. Dry-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

189

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:20 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

5. Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17A.
Exception: Factory-built commercial cooking recirculat-
ing systems that are tested in accordance with UL 710B and
listed, labeled and installed in accordance with Section
304.1 of the International Mechanical Code.

[F] 904.11.1 Manual system operation. A manual actua-
tion device shall be located at or near a means of egress from
the cooking area a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) and a
maximum of 20 feet (6096 mm) from the kitchen exhaust
system. The manual actuation device shall be installed not
more than 48 inches (1200 mm) or less than 42 inches (1067
mm) above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard
protected. The manual actuation shall require a maximum
force of 40 pounds (178 N) and a maximum movement of 14
inches (356 mm) to actuate the fire suppression system.
Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems shall not be
required to be equipped with manual actuation means.
[F] 904.11.2 System interconnection. The actuation of the
fire suppression system shall automatically shut down the
fuel or electrical power supply to the cooking equipment.
The fuel and electrical supply reset shall be manual.
[F] 904.11.3 Carbon dioxide systems. When carbon diox-
ide systems are used, there shall be a nozzle at the top of the
ventilating duct. Additional nozzles that are symmetrically
arranged to give uniform distribution shall be installed
within vertical ducts exceeding 20 feet (6096 mm) and hori-
zontal ducts exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm). Dampers shall
be installed at either the top or the bottom of the duct and
shall be arranged to operate automatically upon activation
of the fire-extinguishing system. Where the damper is
installed at the top of the duct, the top nozzle shall be imme-
diately below the damper. Automatic carbon dioxide
fire-extinguishing systems shall be sufficiently sized to pro-
tect against all hazards venting through a common duct
simultaneously.
[F] 904.11.3.1 Ventilation system. Commercial-type
cooking equipment protected by an automatic carbon
dioxide-extinguishing system shall be arranged to shut
off the ventilation system upon activation.
[F] 904.11.4 Special provisions for automatic sprinkler
systems. Automatic sprinkler systems protecting commer-
cial-type cooking equipment shall be supplied from a sepa-
rate, readily accessible, indicating-type control valve that is
identified.
[F] 904.11.4.1 Listed sprinklers. Sprinklers used for
the protection of fryers shall be tested in accordance with
UL 199E, listed for that application and installed in
accordance with their listing.

SECTION 905
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS

[F] 905.1 General. Standpipe systems shall be provided in new
buildings and structures in accordance with this section. Fire
hose threads used in connection with standpipe systems shall
be approved and shall be compatible with fire department hose
threads. The location of fire department hose connections shall

be approved. In buildings used for high-piled combustible
storage, fire protection shall be in accordance with the Interna-
tional Fire Code.

[F] 905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be
installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14.
[F] 905.3 Required installations. Standpipe systems shall be
installed where required by Sections 905.3.1 through 905.3.7
and in the locations indicated in Sections 905.4, 905.5 and
905.6. Standpipe systems are allowed to be combined with
automatic sprinkler systems.
Exception: Standpipe systems are not required in Group
R-3 occupancies.
[F] 905.3.1 Height. Class III standpipe systems shall be
installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the
highest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or where
the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet
(9144 mm) below the highest level of fire department vehi-
cle access.
Exceptions:
1. C lass I s tandp ipes are a l lowed in bu i ld ings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2.
2. Class I manual standpipes are allowed in open
parking garages where the highest floor is located
not more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) above the low-
est level of fire department vehicle access.
3. Class I manual dry standpipes are allowed in open
parking garages that are subject to freezing tem-
peratures, provided that the hose connections are
located as required for Class II standpipes in accor-
dance with Section 905.5.
4. Class I standpipes are allowed in basements
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system.
5. In determining the lowest level of fire department
vehicle access, it shall not be required to consider:
5.1. Recessed loading docks for four vehicles
or less; and
5.2. Cond i t ion s wh e r e topog r aphy m ak e s
access from the fire department vehicle to
the building impractical or impossible.
[F] 905.3.2 Group A. Class I automatic wet standpipes
shall be provided in nonsprinklered Group A buildings hav-
ing an occupant load exceeding 1,000 persons.
Exceptions:
1. Open-air-seating spaces without enclosed spaces.
2. Class I automatic dry and semiautomatic dry
standpipes or manual wet standpipes are allowed
in buildings where the highest floor surface used
for human occupancy is 75 feet (22 860 mm) or
less above the lowest level of fire department vehi-
cle access.

190

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:21 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 905.3.3 Covered mall buildings. A covered mall build-
ing shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system
where required by Section 905.3.1. Covered mall buildings
not required to be equipped with a standpipe system by Sec-
tion 905.3.1 shall be equipped with Class I hose connections
connected to the automatic sprinkler system sized to deliver
water at 250 gallons per minute (946.4 L/min) at the most
hydraulically remote hose connection while concurrently
supplying the automatic sprinkler system demand. The
standpipe system shall be designed not to exceed a 50
pounds per square inch (psi) (345 kPa) residual pressure
loss with a flow of 250 gallons per minute (946.4 L/min)
from the fire department connection to the hydraulically
most remote hose connection. Hose connections shall be
provided at each of the following locations:
1. Within the mall at the entrance to each exit passage-
way or corridor.
2. At each floor-level landing within enclosed stairways
opening directly on the mall.
3. At exterior public entrances to the mall.
4. At other locations as necessary so that the distance to
reach all portions of a tenant space does not exceed
200 feet (60 960 mm) from a hose connection.
[F] 905.3.4 Stages. Stages greater than 1,000 square feet in
area (93 m2) shall be equipped with a Class III wet standpipe
system with 11/2-inch and 21/2-inch (38 mm and 64 mm)
hose connections on each side of the stage.
Exception: Where the building or area is equipped
throughou t w ith an automatic sprinkler sys tem , a
11/2-inch (38 mm) hose connection shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 13 or in accordance with NFPA
14 for Class II or III standpipes.
[F] 905.3.4.1 Hose and cabinet. The 11/2-inch (38 mm)
hose connections shall be equipped with sufficient
lengths of 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose to provide fire protec-
tion for the stage area. Hose connections shall be
equipped with an approved adjustable fog nozzle and be
mounted in a cabinet or on a rack.
[F] 905.3.5 Underground buildings. Underground build-
ings shall be equipped throughout with a Class I automatic
wet or manual wet standpipe system.
[F] 905.3.6 Helistops and heliports. Buildings with a
helistop or heliport that are equipped with a standpipe shall
extend the standpipe to the roof level on which the helistop
or heliport is located in accordance with Section 1107.5 of
the International Fire Code.

[F] 905.3.7 Marinas and boatyards. Standpipes in mari-
nas and boatyards shall comply with Chapter 45 of the Inter-
national Fire Code.

[F] 905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections.
Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of
the following locations:
1. In every required stairway, a hose connection shall be
provided for each floor level above or below grade. Hose
connections shall be located at an intermediate floor

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

level landing between floors, unless otherwise approved
by the fire code official.
2. On each side of the wall adjacent to the exit opening of a
horizontal exit.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to a horizon-
tal exit are reachable from exit stairway hose connec-
tions by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a
nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of hose, a
hose connection shall not be required at the horizontal
exit.
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit
passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit pas-
sageway are reachable from exit stairway hose con-
nections by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a
nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of hose, a
hose connection shall not be required at the entrance
from the exit passageway to other areas of the build-
ing.
4. In covered mall buildings, adjacent to each exterior pub-
lic entrance to the mall and adjacent to each entrance
from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall.
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in
12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe
shall be provided with a hose connection located either
on the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with
stair access to the roof. An additional hose connection
shall be provided at the top of the most hydraulically
remote standpipe for testing purposes.
6. Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor
or story is more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) from a hose
connection or the most remote portion of a sprinklered
floor or story is more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) from a
hose connection, the fire code official is authorized to
require that additional hose connections be provided in
approved locations.
[F] 905.4.1 Protection. Risers and laterals of Class I
standpipe systems not located within an enclosed stairway
or pressurized enclosure shall be protected by a degree of
fire resistance equal to that required for vertical enclosures
in the building in which they are located.
Exception: In buildings equipped throughout with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, laterals that are
not located within an enclosed stairway or pressurized
enc losure are no t requ ired to be enc losed w ith in
fire-resistance-rated construction.
[F] 905.4.2 Interconnection. In buildings where more than
one standpipe is provided, the standpipes shall be intercon-
nected in accordance with NFPA 14.
[F] 905.5 Location of Class II standpipe hose connections.
Class II standpipe hose connections shall be accessible and
located so that all portions of the building are within 30 feet
(9144 mm) of a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of
hose.
[F] 905.5.1 Groups A-1 and A-2. In Group A-1 and A-2
occupancies with occupant loads of more than 1,000, hose

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

191

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:21 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

connections shall be located on each side of any stage, on
each side of the rear of the auditorium, on each side of the
balcony and on each tier of dressing rooms.
[F] 905.5.2 Protection. Fire-resistance-rated protection of
risers and laterals of Class II standpipe systems is not
required.
[F] 905.5.3 Class II system 1-inch hose. A minimum
1-inch (25 mm) hose shall be permitted to be used for hose
stations in light-hazard occupancies where investigated and
listed for this service and where approved by the fire code
official.
[F] 905.6 Location of Class III standpipe hose connections.
Class III standpipe systems shall have hose connections
located as required for Class I standpipes in Section 905.4 and
shall have Class II hose connections as required in Section
905.5.
[F] 905.6.1 Protection. Risers and laterals of Class III
standpipe systems shall be protected as required for Class I
systems in accordance with Section 905.4.1.
[F] 905.6.2 Interconnection. In buildings where more than
one Class III standpipe is provided, the standpipes shall be
interconnected in accordance with NFPA 14.
[F] 905.7 Cabinets. Cabinets containing fire-fighting equip-
ment such as standpipes, fire hoses, fire extinguishers or fire
department valves shall not be blocked from use or obscured
from view.
[F] 905.7.1 Cabinet equipment identification. Cabinets
shall be identified in an approved manner by a permanently
attached sign with letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm)
high in a color that contrasts with the background color,
indicating the equipment contained therein.
Exceptions:
1. Doors not large enough to accommodate a written
sign shall be marked with a permanently attached
pictogram of the equipment contained therein.
2. Doors that have either an approved visual identifi-
cation clear glass panel or a complete glass door
panel are not required to be marked.
[F] 905.7.2 Locking cabinet doors. Cabinets shall be
unlocked.
Exceptions:
1. Visual identification panels of glass or other
approved transparent frangible material that is
easily broken and allows access.
2. Approved locking arrangements.
3. Group I-3.
[F] 905.8 Dry standpipes. Dry standpipes shall not be
installed.
Exception: Where subject to freezing and in accordance
with NFPA 14.
[F] 905.9 Valve supervision. Valves controlling water sup-
plies shall be supervised in the open position so that a change in
the normal position of the valve will generate a supervisory sig-

nal at the supervising station required by Section 903.4. Where
a fire alarm system is provided, a signal shall also be transmit-
ted to the control unit.
Exceptions:
1. Valves to underground key or hub valves in roadway
boxes provided by the municipality or public utility
do not require supervision.
2. Valves locked in the normal position and inspected as
provided in this code in buildings not equipped with a
fire alarm system.
[F] 905.10 During construction. Standpipe systems required
during construction and demolition operations shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 3311.

SECTION 906
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS

[F] 906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be
installed in the following locations.
1. In new and existing Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2,
R-4 and S occupancies.
Exception: In new and existing Group A, B and E
o c c u p a n c i e s e q u i p p e d t h r o u g h o u t w i t h q u i c k
response sprinklers, portable fire extinguishers shall
be required only in locations specified in Items 2
through 6.
2. Within 30 feet (9144 mm) of commercial cooking equip-
ment.
3. In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are
stored, used or dispensed.
4. On each floor of structures under construction, except
Group R-3 occupancies, in accordance with Section
1415.1 of the International Fire Code.
5. Where required by the International Fire Code sections
indicated in Table 906.1.
6. Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to labora-
tories, computer rooms and generator rooms, where
required by the fire code official.

[F] TABLE 906.1
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS IN
THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE

IFC SECTION

SUBJECT

303.5
Asphalt kettles
307.5
Open burning
308.1.3 Open flames—torches
309.4
Powered industrial trucks
1105.2
Aircraft towing vehicles
1105.3
Aircraft welding apparatus
1105.4
Aircraft fuel-servicing tank vehicles
1105.5
Aircraft hydrant fuel-servicing vehicles
1105.6
Aircraft fuel-dispensing stations

(continued)

192

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:22 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] TABLE 906.1—continued
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS IN
THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE

IFC SECTION

SUBJECT

1107.7

1208.4

1415.1

1417.3

Heliports and helistops

Dry cleaning plants

Buildings under construction or demolition

Roofing operations

1504.4.1

Spray-finishing operations

1505.4.2 Dip-tank operations

1506.4.2

Powder-coating areas

1904.2

1908.8

1909.5

2003.5

2106.3

2205.5

Lumberyards/woodworking facilities

Recycling facilities

Exterior lumber storage

Organic-coating areas

Industrial ovens

Motor fuel-dispensing facilities

2210.6.4 Marine motor fuel-dispensing facilities

2211.6

2306.1

Repair garages

Rack storage

2404.12

Tents and membrane structures

2508.2

Tire rebuilding/storage

2604.2.6 Welding and other hot work

2903.6

Combustible fibers

3403.2.1

Flammable and combustible liquids, general

3404.3.3.1

Indoor storage of flammable and combustible
liquids
3404.3.7.5.2 Liquid storage rooms for flammable and
combustible liquids

3405.4.9

Solvent distillation units

3406.2.7

Farms and construction sites—flammable and
combustible liquids storage
3406.4.10.1 Bulk plants and terminals for flammable and
combustible liquids
3406.5.4.5 Commercial, industrial, governmental or
manufacturing establishments—fuel dispensing

3406.6.4

Tank vehicles for flammable and combustible
liquids

3606.5.7

Flammable solids

3808.2

4504.4

LP-gas

Marinas

[F] 906.2 General requirements. Portable fire extinguishers
shall be selected, installed and maintained in accordance with
this section and NFPA 10.
Exceptions:
1. The travel distance to reach an extinguisher shall not
apply to the spectator seating portions of Group A-5
occupancies.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

2. Thirty-day inspections shall not be required and
maintenance shall be allowed to be once every three
years for dry-chemical or halogenated agent portable
fire extinguishers that are supervised by a listed and
approved electronic monitoring device, provided that
all of the following conditions are met:
2.1. Electron ic monitoring shall confirm that
extinguishers are properly positioned, prop-
erly charged and unobstructed.
2.2. Loss of power or circuit continuity to the elec-
tronic monitoring device shall initiate a trou-
ble signal.
2.3. The extinguishers shall be installed inside of a
building or cabinet in a noncorrosive environ-
ment.
2.4. Electronic monitoring devices and supervi-
sory circuits shall be tested every three years
when extinguisher maintenance is performed.
2.5. A written log of required hydrostatic test dates
for extinguishers shall be maintained by the
owner to verify that hydrostatic tests are con-
ducted at the frequency required by NFPA 10.
3. In Group I-3, portable fire extinguishers shall be per-
mitted to be located at staff locations.
[F] 906.3 Size and distribution. The size and distribution of
portable fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Sections
906.3.1 through 906.3.4.

[F] 906.3.1 Class A fire hazards. The minimum sizes and
distribution of portable fire extinguishers for occupancies
that involve primarily Class A fire hazards shall comply
with Table 906.3(1).

[F] TABLE 906.3(1)
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS FOR CLASS A FIRE HAZARDS

LIGHT
(Low)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY

ORDINARY
(Moderate)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY

EXTRA
(High)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY

Minimum Rated Single
Extinguisher

2-Ac

2-A

4-Aa

Maximum Floor Area
Per Unit of A

3,000 square
feet

1,500 square
feet

1,000 square
feet

Maximum Floor Area for
Extinguisherb

11,250
square feet

11,250
square feet

11,250
square feet

Maximum Travel
Distance to Extinguisher

75 feet

75 feet

75 feet

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929m2, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.
a. Two 21/2-gallon water-type extinguishers shall be deemed the equivalent of
one 4-A rated extinguisher.
b. Annex E.3.3 of NFPA 10 provides more details concerning application of the
maximum floor area criteria.
c. Two water-type extinguishers each with a 1-A rating shall be deemed the
equivalent of one 2-A rated extinguisher for Light (Low) Hazard Occupan-
cies.

[F] 906.3.2 Class B fire hazards. Portable
fire
extinguishers for occupancies involving flammable or com-
bustible liquids with depths less than or equal to 0.25-inch

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

193

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:22 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

(6.35 mm) shall be selected and placed in accordance with
Table 906.3(2).
Portable fire extinguishers for occupancies involving
flammable or combustible liquids with a depth of greater
than 0.25-inch (6.35 mm) shall be selected and placed in
accordance with NFPA 10.

[F] TABLE 906.3(2)
FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS WITH
DEPTHS LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 0.25 INCH

TYPE OF
HAZARD

BASIC MINIMUM
EXTINGUISHER RATING

MAXIMUM TRAVEL DISTANCE
TO EXTINGUISHERS (feet)

Light (Low)

Ordinary
(Moderate)

Extra (High)

5-B
10-B

10-B
20-B

40-B
80-B

30
50

30
50

30
50

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
Note: For requirements on water-soluble flammable liquids and alternative
sizing criteria, see Section 5.5 of NFPA 10.

[F] 906.3.3 Class C fire hazards. Portable
fire
extinguishers for Class C fire hazards shall be selected and
placed on the basis of the anticipated Class A or B hazard.
[F] 906.3.4 Class D fire hazards. Portable
fire
extinguishers for occupancies involving combustible met-
als shall be selected and placed in accordance with NFPA
10.
[F] 906.4 Cooking grease fires. Fire extinguishers provided
for the protection of cooking grease fires shall be of an
approved type compatible with the automatic fire-extinguish-
ing system agent and in accordance with Section 904.11.5 of
the International Fire Code.

[F] 906.5 Conspicuous location. Portable fire extinguishers
shall be located in conspicuous locations where they will be
readily accessible and immediately available for use. These
locations shall be along normal paths of travel, unless the fire
code official determines that the hazard posed indicates the
need for placement away from normal paths of travel.
[F] 906.6 Unobstructed and unobscured. Portable fire
extinguishers shall not be obstructed or obscured from view. In
rooms or areas in which visual obstruction cannot be com-
pletely avoided, means shall be provided to indicate the loca-
tions of extinguishers.
[F] 906.7 Hangers and brackets. Hand-held portable fire
extinguishers, not housed in cabinets, shall be installed on the
hangers or brackets supplied. Hangers or brackets shall be
securely anchored to the mounting surface in accordance with
the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
[F] 906.8 Cabinets. Cabinets used to house portable fire
extinguishers shall not be locked.
Exceptions:
1. Where portable fire extinguishers subject to mali-
cious use or damage are provided with a means of
ready access.

194

2. In Group I-3 occupancies and in mental health areas
in Group I-2 occupancies, access to portable fire
extinguishers shall be permitted to be locked or to be
located in staff locations provided the staff has keys.
[F] 906.9 Extinguisher installation. The installation of porta-
ble fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Sections
906.9.1 through 906.9.3.

[F] 906.9.1 Extinguishers weighing 40 pounds or less.
Portable fire extinguishers having a gross weight not
exceeding 40 pounds (18 kg) shall be installed so that their
tops are not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor.

[F] 906.9.2 Extinguishers weighing more than 40
pounds. Hand-held portable fire extinguishers having a
gross weight exceeding 40 pounds (18 kg) shall be installed
so that their tops are not more than 3.5 feet (1067 mm) above
the floor.

[F] 906.9.3 Floor clearance. The clearance between the
floor and the bottom of installed hand-held portable fire
extinguishers shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm).

[F] 906.10 Wheeled units. Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be
conspicuously located in a designated location.

SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 907.1 General. This section covers the application, instal-
lation, performance and maintenance of fire alarm systems and
their components.

[F] 907.1.1 Construction documents. Construction docu-
ments for fire alarm systems shall be of sufficient clarity to
indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed
and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this code, the International Fire Code, and relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the fire
code official.

[F] 907.1.2 Fire alarm shop drawings. Shop drawings for
fire alarm systems shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to system installation, and shall include, but
not be limited to, all of the following:

1. A floor plan that indicates the use of all rooms.
2. Locations of alarm-initiating devices.
3. Locations of alarm notification appliances, includ-
ing candela ratings for visible alarm notification
appliances.
4. Location of fire alarm control unit, transponders and
notification power supplies.
5. Annunciators.
6. Power connection.
7. Battery calculations.
8. Conductor type and sizes.
9. Voltage drop calculations.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg194.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:00:22 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

10. Manufacturers’ data sheets indicating model num-
bers and listing information for equipment, devices
and materials.
11. Details of ceiling height and construction.
12. The interface of fire safety control functions.
13. Classification of the supervising station.
[F] 907.1.3 Equipment. Systems and components shall be
listed and approved for the purpose for which they are
installed.
[F] 907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures.
An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new
buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1
through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accor-
dance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are pro-
vided by another section of this code.
A minimum of one manual fire alarm box shall be provided
in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire
alarm systems employing automatic fire detectors or waterflow
detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow
elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire
alarm box shall be installed.
Exceptions:
1. The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire
alarm systems dedicated to elevator recall control and
supervisory service.
2. The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group
R-2 occupancies unless required by the fire code offi-
cial to provide a means for fire watch personnel to ini-
tiate an alarm during a sprinkler system impairment
event. Where provided, the manual fire alarm box
shall not be located in an area that is accessible to the
public.
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies
having an occupant load of 300 or more. Portions of Group
E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be pro-
vided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E
occupancy.
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required
where the building is equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances
will activate throughout the notification zones upon
sprinkler waterflow.
[F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupan-
cies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more. Activa-
tion of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an
occupant load of 1,000 or more shall initiate a signal
using an emergency voice/alarm communications sys-
tem in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
Ex c ep t ion : Wh e r e app rov ed , th e p r e r e co rd ed
announcement is allowed to be manually deactivated
for a period of time, not to exceed 3 minutes, for the

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

sole purpose of allowing a live voice announcement
from an approved, constantly attended location.
[F] 907.2.2 Group B. A manual fire alarm system shall be
installed in Group B occupancies where one of the follow-
ing conditions exists:
1. The combined Group B occupant load of all floors is
500 or more.
2. The Group B occupant load is more than 100 persons
above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
3. The Group B fire area contains a Group B ambulatory
health care facility.
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required
where the building is equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances
will activate throughout the notification zones upon
sprinkler waterflow.
[F] 907.2.2.1 Group B ambulatory health care facili-
ties. Fire areas containing Group B ambulatory health
care facilities shall be provided with an electronically
supervised automatic smoke detection system installed
within the ambulatory health care facility and in public
use areas outside of tenant spaces, including public cor-
ridors and elevator lobbies.
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1, provided the occupant notification
appliances will activate throughout the notification
zones upon sprinkler waterflow.
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group E occupancies.
When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are
installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the
building fire alarm system.
Exceptions:
1. A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E
occupancies with an occupant load of less than 50.
2. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required in Group E
occupancies where all of the following apply:
2.1. Interior corridors are protected by smoke de-
tectors.
2.2. Auditoriums, cafeterias, gymnasiums and
similar areas are protected by heat detectors
or other approved detection devices.
2.3. Shops and laboratories involving dusts or va-
pors are protected by heat detectors or other
approved detection devices.
2.4. The capability to activate the evacuation sig-
nal from a central point is provided.
2.5. In buildings where normally occupied spaces
are provided with a two-way communication
system between such spaces and a constantly
attended receiving station from where a gen-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

195

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:37 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

eral evacuation alarm can be sounded, except
in locations specifically designated by the fire
code official.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in
Group E occupancies where the building is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
s y s t em i n s t a l l e d i n a c c o r da n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1, the notification appliances will activate on
sprinkler waterflow and manual activation is pro-
vided from a normally occupied location.
[F] 907.2.4 Group F. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group F occupancies
where both of the following conditions exist:
1. The Group F occupancy is two or more stories in
height; and
2. The Group F occupancy has a combined occupant
load of 500 or more above or below the lowest level of
exit discharge.
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required
where the building is equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances
will activate throughout the notification zones upon
sprinkler waterflow.
[F] 907.2.5 Group H. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system shall be installed in
Group H-5 occupancies and in occupancies used for the
manufacture of organic coatings. An automatic smoke
detection system that activates the occupant notification
system shall be installed for highly toxic gases, organic per-
oxides and oxidizers in accordance with Chapters 37, 39
and 40, respectively, of the International Fire Code.
[F] 907.2.6 Group I. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system shall be installed in
Group I occupancies. An automatic smoke detection system
that activates the occupant notification system shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Sections 907.2.6.1, 907.2.6.2 and
907.2.6.3.3.
Exceptions:
1. Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient
sleeping areas of Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies
shall not be required at exits if located at all nurses’
control stations or other constantly attended staff
locations, provided such stations are visible and
continuously accessible and that travel distances
required in Section 907.4.2 are not exceeded.
2. Occupant notification systems are not required to
b e a c t iv a ted wh e r e p r iv a te mod e s ign a l ing
installed in accordance with NFPA 72 is approved
by the fire code official.
[F] 907.2.6.1 Group I-1. An automatic smoke detection
system shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open
to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping

units and kitchens. The system shall be activated in
accordance with Section 907.5.
Exceptions:
1. Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not
required where the facility is equipped through-
out with an automatic sprinkler system installed
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Smoke detection is not required for exterior
balconies.
[F] 907.2.6.1.1 Smoke alarms. Single- and multi-
ple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accor-
dance with Section 907.2.11.
[F] 907.2.6.2 Group I-2. An automatic smoke detection
system shall be installed in corridors in nursing homes
(both intermediate care and skilled nursing facilities),
detoxification facilities and spaces permitted to be open
to the corridors by Section 407.2. The system shall be
activated in accordance with Section 907.5. Hospitals
shall be equipped with smoke detection as required in
Section 407.
Exceptions:
1. Corridor smoke detection is not required in
smoke compartments that contain patient sleep-
ing units where such units are provided with
smoke detectors that comply with UL 268.
Such detectors shall provide a visual display on
the corridor side of each patient sleeping unit
and shall provide an audible and visual alarm at
the nursing station attending each unit.
2. Corridor smoke detection is not required in
smoke compartments that contain patient sleep-
ing units where patient sleeping unit doors are
equipped with automatic door-closing devices
with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides
installed in accordance with their listing, pro-
vided that the integral detectors perform the
required alerting function.
[F] 907.2.6.3 Group I-3 occupancies. Group I-3 occu-
pancies shall be equipped with a manual fire alarm sys-
tem and automatic smoke detection system installed for
alerting staff.
[F] 907.2.6.3.1 System initiation. Actuation of an
automatic fire-extinguishing system, a manual fire
alarm box or a fire detector shall initiate an approved
fire alarm signal which automatically notifies staff.
[F] 907.2.6.3.2 Manual fire alarm boxes. Manual
fire alarm boxes are not required to be located in
accordance with Section 907.4.2 where the fire alarm
boxes are provided at staff-attended locations having
direct supervision over areas where manual fire alarm
boxes have been omitted.
907 .2 .6 .3 .2 .1 Manua l fire a la rm boxe s in
detainee areas. Manual fire alarm boxes are
allowed to be locked in areas occupied by detain-

196

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:37 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ees, provided that staff members are present within
the subject area and have keys readily available to
operate the manual fire alarm boxes.
[F] 907.2.6.3.3 Automatic smoke detection system.
An au tomatic smoke detection system shall be
installed throughout resident housing areas, including
sleeping units and contiguous day rooms, group activ-
ity spaces and other common spaces normally acces-
sible to residents.
Exceptions:
1. Other approved smoke detection arrange-
men ts p rov id ing equ iva len t p ro tec t ion ,
including, but not limited to, placing detec-
tors in exhaust ducts from cells or behind
protective guards listed for the purpose, are
allowed when necessary to prevent damage
or tampering.
2. Sleeping units in Use Conditions 2 and 3 as
described in Section 308.
3. Smoke detectors are not required in sleeping
units with four or fewer occupants in smoke
compartments that are equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system installed
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
[F] 907.2.7 Group M. A manual fire alarm system that acti-
vates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group M occupancies
where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The combined Group M occupant load of all floors is
500 or more persons.
2. The Group M occupant load is more than 100 persons
above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
Exceptions:
1. A manual fire alarm system is not required in cov-
ered mall buildings complying with Section 402.
2. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appli-
ances will automatically activate throughout the
notification zones upon sprinkler waterflow.
[F] 907.2.7.1 Occupant notification. During times that
the building is occupied, the initiation of a signal from a
manual fire alarm box or from a waterflow switch shall
not be required to activate the alarm notification appli-
ances when an alarm signal is activated at a constantly
attended location from which evacuation instructions
shall be initiated over an emergency voice/alarm com-
munication system installed in accordance with Section
907.5.2.2.
[F] 907.2.8 Group R-1. Fire alarm systems and smoke
alarms shall be installed in Group R-1 occupancies as
required in Sections 907.2.8.1 through 907.2.8.3.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 907.2.8.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire
alarm system that activates the occupant notification sys-
tem in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in
Group R-1 occupancies.

Exceptions:
1. A manual fire alarm system is not required in
buildings not more than two stories in height
where all individual sleeping units and contigu-
ous attic and crawl spaces to those units are sep-
arated from each other and public or common
areas by at least 1-hour fire partitions and each
individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a
public way, exit court or yard.
2. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required
throughout the building when all of the follow-
ing conditions are met:
2.1. The building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2;
2.2. The notification appliances will acti-
vate upon sprinkler waterflow; and
2.3. At least one manual fire alarm box is
installed at an approved location.
[F] 907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An
automatic smoke detection system that activates the
occupant notification system in accordance with Section
907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors
serving sleeping units.
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is
not required in buildings that do not have interior cor-
ridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping
unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an
exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to
an exit.

[F] 907.2.8.3 Smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-sta-
tion smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.2.11.
[F] 907.2.9 Group R-2. Fire alarm systems and smoke
alarms shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies as
required in Sections 907.2.9.1 and 907.9.2.
[F] 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire
alarm system that activates the occupant notification sys-
tem in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in
Group R-2 occupancies where:
1. Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located three
or more stories above the lowest level of exit dis-
charge;
2. Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located more
than one story below the highest level of exit dis-
charge of exits serving the dwelling unit or sleep-
ing unit; or

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

197

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:38 AM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

3. The building contains more than 16 dwelling units
or sleeping units.

Exceptions:
1. A fire alarm system is not required in buildings
not more than two stories in height where all
dwelling units or sleeping units and contiguous
attic and crawl spaces are separated from each
other and public or common areas by at least
1-hour fire partitions and each dwelling unit or
sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public
way, exit court or yard.
2. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where
the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system installed in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and
the occupant notification appliances will auto-
matically activate throughout the notification
zones upon a sprinkler waterflow.
3. A fire alarm system is not required in buildings
that do not have interior corridors serving
dwelling units and are protected by an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, pro-
vided that dwelling units either have a means of
egress door opening directly to an exterior exit
access that leads directly to the exits or are
served by open-ended corridors designed in
accordance with Section 1026.6, Exception 4.
[F] 907.2.9.2 Smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-sta-
tion smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.2.11.
[F] 907.2.10 Group R-4. Fire alarm systems and smoke
alarms shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies as
required in Sections 907.2.10.1 through 907.2.10.3.
[F] 907.2.10.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual
fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification
system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be
installed in Group R-4 occupancies.
Exceptions:
1. A manual fire alarm system is not required in
buildings not more than two stories in height
where all individual sleeping units and contigu-
ous attic and crawl spaces to those units are sep-
arated from each other and public or common
areas by at least 1-hour fire partitions and each
individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a
public way, exit court or yard.
2. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required
throughout the building when the following
conditions are met:
2.1. The building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system

installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2;
2.2. The notification appliances will acti-
vate upon sprinkler waterflow; and
2.3. At least one manual fire alarm box is
installed at an approved location.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient
sleeping areas shall not be required at exits
where located at all nurses’ control stations or
other constantly attended staff locations, pro-
vided such stations are visible and continuously
accessible and that travel distances required in
Section 907.4.2.1 are not exceeded.
[F] 907.2.10.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An
automatic smoke detection system that activates the
occupant notification system in accordance with Section
907.5 shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open
to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping
units and kitchens.

Exceptions:
1. Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not
required where the facility is equipped through-
out with an automatic sprinkler system installed
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. An automatic smoke detection system is not
required in buildings that do not have interior
corridors serving sleeping units and where
each sleeping unit has a means of egress door
opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit
access that leads directly to an exit.
[F] 907.2.10.3 Smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-sta-
tion smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.2.11.
[F] 907.2.11 Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.
Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms comply-
ing with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance with Sec-
tions 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.4 and NFPA 72.
[F] 907.2.11.1 Group R-1. Single- or multiple-station
smoke alarms shall be installed in all of the following
locations in Group R-1:
1. In sleeping areas.
2. In every room in the path of the means of egress
from the sleeping area to the door leading from the
sleeping unit.
3. In each story within the sleeping unit, including
basements. For sleeping units with split levels and
without an intervening door between the adjacent
levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level
shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided
that the lower level is less than one full story below
the upper level.

198

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:38 AM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. Single- or
multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of
occupant load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bed-
rooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
Exception: Single- or multiple-station smoke
alarms in Group I-1 shall not be required where
smoke detectors are provided in the sleeping
rooms as part of an automatic smoke detection
system.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including
basements but not including crawl spaces and
uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units
with split levels and without an intervening door
be tween the ad jacen t leve ls , a smoke a larm
installed on the upper level shall suffice for the
adjacent lower level provided that the lower level
is less than one full story below the upper level.
[F] 907.2.11.3 Interconnection. Where more than one
smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individ-
ual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in Group R-1, R-2, R-3
or R-4, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such
a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all
of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be
clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise
levels with all intervening doors closed.
[F] 907.2.11.4 Power source. In new construction,
required smoke alarms shall receive their primary power
from the building wiring where such wiring is served
from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a
battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral strobes that
are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected
to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall
emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be
permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than
as required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be
equipped with battery backup where they are con-
nected to an emergency electrical system.
[F] 907.2.12 Special amusement buildings. An automatic
smoke detection system shall be provided in special amuse-
ment buildings in accordance with Sections 907.2.12.1
through 907.2.12.3.
[F] 907.2.12.1 Alarm. Activation of any single smoke
detector, the automatic sprinkler system or any other
automatic fire detection device shall immediately sound
an alarm at the building at a constantly attended location
from which emergency action can be initiated, including
the capability of manual initiation of requirements in
Section 907.2.12.2.
[F] 907.2.12.2 System response. The activation of two
or more smoke detectors, a single smoke detector
equipped with an alarm verification feature, the auto-

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

matic sprinkler system or other approved fire detection
device shall automatically:

1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with
light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the
walking surface level;
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and
visual distractions;
3. Activate an approved directional exit marking that
will become apparent in an emergency; and
4. Activate a prerecorded message, audible through-
out the special amusement building, instructing
patrons to proceed to the nearest exit. Alarm sig-
nals used in conjunction with the prerecorded mes-
sage shall produce a sound which is distinctive
from other sounds used during normal operation.
[F] 907.2.12.3 Emergency voice/alarm communica-
tion system. An emergency voice/alarm communication
system, which is also allowed to serve as a public address
system, shall be installed in accordance with Section
907.5.2.2 and be audible throughout the entire special
amusement building.

[F] 907.2.13 High-rise buildings. Buildings with a floor
used for human occupancy located more than 75 feet (22
860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle
access shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection
system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire depart-
ment communication system in accordance with Section
907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication
system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

Exceptions:

1. Airport traffic control towers in accordance with
Sections 907.2.22 and 412.
2. Open parking garages in accordance with Section
406.3.
3. Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in
accordance with Section 303.1.
4. Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance
with Section 503.1.1.
5. Buildings with an occupancy in Group H-1, H-2 or
H-3 in accordance with Section 415.
6. In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall
sound at a constantly attended location and gen-
eral occupant notification shall be broadcast by the
emergency voice/alarm communication system.
[F] 907.2.13.1 Automatic smoke detection. Automatic
smoke detection in high-rise buildings shall be in accor-
dance with Sections 907.2.13.1.1 and 907.2.13.1.2.

[F] 907.2.13.1.1 Area smoke detection. Area smoke
detectors shall be provided in accordance with this
section. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an
automatic fire alarm system. The activation of any
detector required by this section shall operate the
emergency voice/alarm communication system in

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

199

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:39 AM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. Smoke detectors
shall be located as follows:
1. In each mechanical equipment , electrical ,
transformer, telephone equipment or similar
room which is not provided with sprinkler pro-
tection.
2. In each elevator machine room and in elevator
lobbies.
[F] 907.2.13.1.2 Duct smoke detection. Duct smoke
detectors complying with Section 907.3.1 shall be
located as follows:
1. In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of
each air-conditioning system having a capacity
greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm)
(0.94 m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a
serviceable area downstream of the last duct
inlet.
2. At each connection to a vertical duct or riser
serving two or more stories from a return air
duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system.
In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke
detector is allowed to be used in each return air
riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4
m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet
openings.
[F] 907.2.13.2 Fire department communication sys-
tem. Where a wired communication system is approved
in lieu of a radio coverage system in accordance with
Section 510 of the International Fire Code, the wired fire
department communication system shall be designed
and installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall oper-
ate between a fire command center complying with Sec-
tion 911, elevators, elevator lobbies, emergency and
standby power rooms, fire pump rooms, areas of refuge
and inside enclosed exit stairways. The fire department
communication device shall be provided at each floor
level within the enclosed exit stairway.
[F] 907.2.14 Atriums connecting more than two stories.
A fire alarm system shall be installed in occupancies with an
atrium that connects more than two stories, with smoke
detection installed throughout the atrium. The system shall
be activated in accordance with Section 907.5. Such occu-
pancies in Group A, E or M shall be provided with an emer-
gency voice/alarm communication system complying with
the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2.
[F] 907.2.15 High-piled combustible storage areas. An
automatic smoke detection system shall be installed
throughout high-piled combustible storage areas where
required by Section 2306.5 of the International Fire Code.
[F] 907.2.16 Aerosol storage uses. Aerosol storage rooms
and general-purpose warehouses containing aerosols shall
be provided with an approved manual fire alarm system
where required by the International Fire Code.

[F] 907.2.17 Lumber, wood structural panel and veneer
mills. Lumber, wood structural panel and veneer mills shall
be provided with a manual fire alarm system.

[F] 907.2.18 Underground buildings with smoke control
systems. Where a smoke control system is installed in an
underground building in accordance with this code, auto-
matic smoke detectors shall be provided in accordance with
Section 907.2.18.1.

[F] 907.2.18.1 Smoke detectors. A minimum of one
smoke detector listed for the intended purpose shall be
installed in the following areas:
1. Mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer,
telephone equipment, elevator machine or similar
rooms.
2. Elevator lobbies.
3. The main return and exhaust air plenum of each
air-conditioning system serving more than one
story and located in a serviceable area downstream
of the last duct inlet.
4. Each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving
two or more floors from return air ducts or ple-
nums of heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
systems, except that in Group R occupancies, a
listed smoke detector is allowed to be used in each
return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm
(2.4 m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet
openings.
[F] 907.2.18.2 Alarm required. Activation of the smoke
control system shall activate an audible alarm at a con-
stantly attended location.

[F] 907.2.19 Deep underground buildings. Where the
lowest level of a structure is more than 60 feet (18 288 mm)
below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge,
the structure shall be equipped throughout with a manual
fire alarm system, including an emergency voice/alarm
communication system installed in accordance with Section
907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.20 Covered mall buildings. Covered mall build-
ings exceeding 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) in total floor
area shall be provided with an emergency voice/alarm com-
munication system. An emergency voice/alarm communi-
cation system serving a mall, required or otherwise, shall be
accessible to the fire department. The system shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.21 Residential aircraft hangars. A minimum of
one single-station smoke alarm shall be installed within a
residential aircraft hangar as defined in Section 412.3.1 and
shall be interconnected into the residential smoke alarm or
other sounding device to provide an alarm which will be
audible in all sleeping areas of the dwelling.

[F] 907.2.22 Airport traffic control towers. An automatic
smoke detection system that activates the occupant notifica-
tion system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be pro-
vided in airport control
towers in all occupiable and
equipment spaces.

Exception: Audible appliances shall not be installed
within the control tower cab.

200

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:39 AM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 907.2.23 Battery rooms. An automatic smoke detec-
tion system shall be installed in areas containing stationary
storage battery systems with a liquid capacity of more than
50 gallons (189 L).
[F] 907.3 Fire safety functions. Automatic fire detectors uti-
lized for the purpose of performing fire safety functions shall
be connected to the building’s fire alarm control unit where a
fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Detectors shall,
upon actuation, perform the intended function and activate the
alarm notification appliances or activate a visible and audible
supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. In build-
ings not equipped with a fire alarm system, the automatic fire
detector shall be powered by normal electrical service and,
upon actuation, perform the intended function. The detectors
shall be located in accordance with NFPA 72.
[F] 907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors. Smoke detectors
installed in ducts shall be listed for the air velocity, tempera-
ture and humidity present in the duct. Duct smoke detectors
shall be connected to the building’s fire alarm control unit
when a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Acti-
vation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and
audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location
and shall perform the intended fire safety function in accor-
dance with this code and the International Mechanical
Code. Duct smoke detectors shall not be used as a substitute
for required open area detection.
Exceptions:
1. The supervisory signal at a constantly attended
location is not required where duct smoke detec-
tors activate the building’s alarm notification
appliances.
2. In occupancies not required to be equipped with a
fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector
shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an
approved location. Smoke detector trouble condi-
tions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an
approved location and shall be identified as air
duct detector trouble.
[F] 907.3.2 Delayed egress locks. Where delayed egress
locks are installed on means of egress doors in accordance
with Section 1008.1.9.6, an automatic smoke or heat detec-
tion system shall be installed as required by that section.
[F] 907.3.3 Elevator emergency operation. Automatic
fire detectors installed for elevator emergency operation
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of
ASME A17.1 and NFPA 72.
[F] 907.3.4 Wiring. The wiring to the auxiliary devices and
equipment used to accomplish the above fire safety func-
tions shall be monitored for integrity in accordance with
NFPA 72.
[F] 907.4 Initiating devices. Where manual or automatic
alarm initiation is required as part of a fire alarm system, the
initiating devices shall be installed in accordance with Sections
907.4.1 through 907.4.3.
[F] 907.4.1 Protection of fire alarm control unit. In areas
that are not continuously occupied, a single smoke detector

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

shall be provided at the location of each fire alarm control
unit, notification appliance circuit power extenders, and
supervising station transmitting equipment.
Exceptions:
1. Where ambient conditions prohibit installation of
a smoke detector, a heat detector shall be permit-
ted.
2. The smoke detector shall not be required where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
[F] 907.4.2 Manual fire alarm boxes. Where a manual fire
alarm system is required by another section of this code, it
shall be activated by fire alarm boxes installed in accordance
with Sections 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.5.
[F] 907.4.2.1 Location. Manual fire alarm boxes shall be
located not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the
entrance to each exit. Additional manual fire alarm boxes
shall be located so that travel distance to the nearest box
does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm).
[F] 907.4.2.2 Height. The height of the manual fire
alarm boxes shall be a minimum of 42 inches (1067 mm)
and a maximum of 48 inches (1372 mm) measured verti-
cally, from the floor level to the activating handle or lever
of the box.
[F] 907.4.2.3 Color. Manual fire alarm boxes shall be red
in color.
[F] 907.4.2.4 Signs. Where fire alarm systems are not
monitored by a supervising station, an approved perma-
nent sign shall be installed adjacent to each manual fire
alarm box that reads: WHEN ALARM SOUNDS CALL
FIRE DEPARTMENT.
Exception: Where the manufacturer has permanently
provided this information on the manual fire alarm
box.
[F] 907.4.2.5 Protective covers. The fire code official is
authorized to require the installation of listed manual fire
alarm box protective covers to prevent malicious false
alarms or to provide the manual fire alarm box with pro-
tection from physical damage. The protective cover shall
be transparent or red in color with a transparent face to
permit visibility of the manual fire alarm box. Each cover
shall include proper operating instructions. A protective
cover that emits a local alarm signal shall not be installed
unless approved. Protective covers shall not project more
than that permitted by Section 1003.3.3.
[F] 907.4.3 Automatic smoke detection. Where an auto-
matic smoke detection system is required it shall utilize
smoke detectors unless ambient conditions prohibit such an
installation. In spaces where smoke detectors cannot be uti-
lized due to ambient conditions, approved automatic heat
detectors shall be permitted.
907.4.3.1 Automatic sprinkler system. For conditions
other than specific fire safety functions noted in Section
907.3, in areas where ambient conditions prohibit the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

201

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:39 AM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

installation of smoke detectors, an automatic sprinkler
system installed in such areas in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and that is connected to the fire
alarm system shall be approved as automatic heat detec-
tion.
[F] 907.5 Occupant notification systems. A fire alarm system
shall annunciate at the panel and shall initiate occupant notifi-
cation upon activation, in accordance with Sections 907.5.1
through 907.5.2.3.4. Where a fire alarm system is required by
another section of this code, it shall be activated by:
1. Automatic fire detectors.
2. Sprinkler waterflow devices.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes.
4. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems.
Exception: Where notification systems are allowed else-
where in Section 907 to annunciate at a constantly attended
location.

[F] 907.5.1 Presignal feature. A presignal feature shall not
be installed unless approved by the fire code official and the
fire department. Where a presignal feature is provided, a
signal shall be annunciated at a constantly attended location
approved by the fire department, in order that occupant noti-
fication can be activated in the event of fire or other emer-
gency.
[F] 907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances. Alarm notifi-
cation appliances shall be provided and shall be listed for
their purpose.
[F] 907.5.2.1 Audible alarms. Audible alarm notifica-
tion appliances shall be provided and emit a distinctive
sound that is not to be used for any purpose other than
that of a fire alarm.
Exception: Visible alarm notification appliances
shall be allowed in lieu of audible alarm notification
appliances in critical care areas of Group I-2 occupan-
cies.
907.5.2.1.1 Average sound pressure. The audible
alarm notification appliances shall provide a sound
pressure level of 15 decibels (dBA) above the average
ambient sound level or 5 dBA above the maximum
sound level having a duration of at least 60 seconds,
whichever is greater, in every occupiable space
within the building. The minimum sound pressure
levels shall be: 75 dBA in occupancies in Groups R
and I-1; 90 dBA in mechanical equipment rooms and
60 dBA in other occupancies.
907.5.2.1.2 Maximum sound pressure. The maxi-
mum sound pressure level for audible alarm notifica-
tion appliances shall be 110 dBA at the minimum
hearing distance from the audible appliance. Where
the average ambient noise is greater than 95 dBA, vis-
ible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in
accordance with NFPA 72 and audible alarm notifica-
tion appliances shall not be required.
907.5.2.2 Emergency voice/alarm communication
systems. Emergency voice/alarm communication sys-

202

tems required by this code shall be designed and installed
in accordance with NFPA 72. The operation of any auto-
matic fire detector, sprinkler waterflow device or manual
fire alarm box shall automatically sound an alert tone fol-
lowed by voice instructions giving approved information
and directions for a general or staged evacuation in
accordance with the building’s fire safety and evacuation
plans required by Section 404. In high-rise buildings, the
system shall operate on a minimum of the alarming floor,
the floor above and the floor below. Speakers shall be
provided throughout the building by paging zones. At a
minimum, paging zones shall be provided as follows:
1. Elevator groups.
2. Exit stairways.
3. Each floor.
4. Areas of refuge as defined in Section 1002.1.
Exception: In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the
alarm shall sound in a constantly attended area and a
general occupant notification shall be broadcast over
the overhead page.
[F] 907.5.2.2.1 Manual override. A manual override
for emergency voice communication shall be pro-
vided on a selective and all-call basis for all paging
zones.
[F] 907.5.2.2.2 Live voice messages. The emergency
voice/alarm communication system shall also have
the capability to broadcast live voice messages by
paging zones on a selective and all-call basis.
[F] 907.5.2.2.3 Alternate uses. The emergency
voice/alarm communication system shall be allowed
to be used for other announcements, provided the
manual fire alarm use takes precedence over any other
use.
[F] 907 .5 .2 .2 .4 Emergency power. Emergency
voice/alarm communications systems shall be pro-
vided with an approved emergency power source.
[F] 907.5.2.3 Visible alarms. Visible alarm notification
appliances shall be provided in accordance with Sections
907.5.2.3.1 through 907.5.2.3.4.
Exceptions:
1. Visible alarm notification appliances are not
required in alterations, except where an exist-
ing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced,
or a new fire alarm system is installed.
2. Visible alarm notification appliances shall not
be required in exits as defined in Section
1002.1.
3. Visible alarm notification appliances shall not
be required in elevator cars.
[F] 907.5.2.3.1 Public and common areas. Visible
alarm notification appliances shall be provided in
public areas and common areas.
[F] 907 .5 .2 .3 .2 Emp loyee work areas . Where
employee work areas have audible alarm coverage,

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:40 AM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

th e no t i fica t ion app l ian ce c i rcu i t s se rv ing th e
employee work areas shall be initially designed with a
minimum of 20-percent spare capacity to account for
the potential of adding visible notification appliances
in the future to accommodate hearing impaired
employee(s).
[F] 907.5.2.3.3 Groups I-1 and R-1. Group I-1 and

R-1 dwelling units or sleeping units in accordance
with Table 907.5.2.3.3 shall be provided with a visible
alarm notification appliance, activated by both the
in-room smoke alarm and the building fire alarm sys-
tem.

[F] TABLE 907.5.2.3.3
VISIBLE ALARMS

NUMBER OF SLEEP UNITS

SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS WITH
VISIBLE ALARMS

6 to 25

26 to 50

51 to 75

76 to 100

101 to 150

151 to 200

201 to 300

301 to 400

401 to 500

2

4

7

9

12

14

17

20

22

501 to 1,000

5% of total

1,001 and over

50 plus 3 for each 100 over 1,000

[F] 907.5.2.3.4 Group R-2. In Group R-2 occupan-
cies required by Section 907 to have a fire alarm sys-
tem, all dwelling units and sleeping units shall be
provided with the capability to support visible alarm
notification appliances in accordance with ICC
A117.1.
[F] 907.6 Installation. A fire alarm system shall be installed in
accordance with this section and NFPA 72.
[F] 907.6.1 Wiring. Wiring shall comply with the require-
ments of NFPA 70 and NFPA 72. Wireless protection sys-
tems utilizing radio-frequency transmitting devices shall
comply with the special requirements for supervision of
low-power wireless systems in NFPA 72.
[F] 907.6.2 Power supply. The primary and secondary
power supply for the fire alarm system shall be provided in
accordance with NFPA 72.
Exception: Back-up power for single-station and multi-
p le - s ta t ion smoke a la rm s a s requ i red in S ec t ion
907.2.11.4.
[F] 907.6.3 Zones. Each floor shall be zoned separately and
a zone shall not exceed 22,500 square feet (2090 m2). The

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm) in
any direction.
Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not
exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13.
[F] 907.6.3.1 Zoning indicator panel. A zoning indica-
tor panel and the associated controls shall be provided in
an approved location. The visual zone indication shall
lock in until the system is reset and shall not be canceled
by the operation of an audible-alarm silencing switch.
[F] 907.6.3.2 High-rise buildings. In high-rise build-
ings, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for each
of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where
provided:
1. Smoke detectors.
2. Sprinkler waterflow devices.
3. Manual fire alarm boxes.
4. Other approved types of automatic fire detection
devices or suppression systems.
[F] 907.6.4 Access. Access shall be provided to each fire
alarm device and notification appliance for periodic inspec-
tion, maintenance and testing.
[F] 907.6.5 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by
this chapter or by the International Fire Code shall be moni-
tored by an approved supervising station in accordance with
NFPA 72.
Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not
required for:
1. S in g l e - an d m u l t ip l e - s t a t io n smo k e a l a rm s
required by Section 907.2.11.
2. Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-fam-
ily dwellings.
[F] 907.6.5.1 Automatic telephone-dialing devices.
Automatic telephone-dialing devices used to transmit an
emergency alarm shall not be connected to any fire
department telephone number unless approved by the
fire chief.
[F] 907.7 Acceptance tests and completion. Upon comple-
tion of the installation, the fire alarm system and all fire alarm
components shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 72.
[F] 907.7.1 Single- and multiple-station alarm devices.
When the installation of the alarm devices is complete, each
device and interconnecting wiring for multiple-station
alarm devices shall be tested in accordance with the smoke
alarm provisions of NFPA 72.
[F] 907.7.2 Record of completion. A record of completion
in accordance with NFPA 72 verifying that the system has
been installed and tested in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications shall be provided.
[F] 907.7.3 Instructions. Operating, testing and mainte-
nance instructions and record drawings (“as-builts”) and

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

203

09_ibc_2009pg194-203.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:01:40 AM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

equipment specifications shall be provided at an approved
location.
[F] 907.8 Inspection, testing and maintenance. The mainte-
nance and testing schedules and procedures for fire alarm and
fire detection systems shall be in accordance with Section
907.9 of the International Fire Code.

SECTION 908
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
[F] 908.1 Group H occupancies. Emergency alarms for the
detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group
H occupancies shall be provided in accordance with Section
414.7.
[F] 908.2 Group H-5 occupancy. Emergency alarms for noti-
fication of an emergency condition in an HPM facility shall be
provided as required in Section 415.8.4.6. A continuous
gas-detection system shall be provided for HPM gases in
accordance with Section 415.8.7.
[F] 908.3 Highly toxic and toxic materials. A gas detection
system shall be provided to detect the presence of highly toxic
or toxic gas at or below the permissible exposure limit (PEL) or
ceiling limit of the gas for which detection is provided. The sys-
tem shall be capable of monitoring the discharge from the treat-
ment system at or below one-half the immediately dangerous to
life and health (IDLH) limit.
Exception: A gas-detection system is not required for toxic
gases when the physiological warning threshold level for
the gas is at a level below the accepted PEL for the gas.
[F] 908.3.1 Alarms. The gas detection system shall initiate
a local alarm and transmit a signal to a constantly attended
control station when a short-term hazard condition is
detected. The alarm shall be both visible and audible and
shall provide warning both inside and outside the area
where gas is detected. The audible alarm shall be distinct
from all other alarms.
Exception: Signal transmission to a constantly attended
control station is not required when not more than one
cylinder of highly toxic or toxic gas is stored.
[F] 908.3.2 Shutoff of gas supply. The gas detection sys-
tem shall automatically close the shutoff valve at the source
on gas supply piping and tubing related to the system being
monitored for whichever gas is detected.
Exception: Automatic shutdown is not required for
reactors utilized for the production of highly toxic or
toxic compressed gases where such reactors are:
1. Operated at pressures less than 15 pounds per
square inch gauge (psig) (103.4 kPa).
2. Constantly attended.
3. Provided with readily accessible emergency shut-
off valves.
[F] 908.3.3 Valve closure. The automatic closure of shutoff
valves shall be in accordance with the following:
1. When the gas-detection sampling point initiating the
gas detection system alarm is within a gas cabinet or

exhausted enclosure, the shutoff valve in the gas cabi-
net or exhausted enclosure for the specific gas
detected shall automatically close.
2. Where the gas-detection sampling point initiating the
gas detection system alarm is within a gas room and
compressed gas containers are not in gas cabinets or
exhausted enclosures, the shutoff valves on all gas
lines for the specific gas detected shall automatically
close.
3. Where the gas-detection sampling point initiating the
gas detection system alarm is within a piping distribu-
tion manifold enclosure, the shutoff valve for the
compressed container of specific gas detected supply-
ing the manifold shall automatically close.
Exception: When the gas-detection sampling point initi-
ating the gas-detection system alarm is at a use location
or within a gas valve enclosure of a branch line down-
stream of a piping distribution manifold, the shutoff
valve in the gas valve enclosure for the branch line
located in the piping distribution manifold enclosure
shall automatically close.
[F] 908.4 Ozone gas-generator rooms. Ozone gas-generator
rooms shall be equipped with a continuous gas-detection sys-
tem that will shut off the generator and sound a local alarm
when concentrations above the PEL occur.
[F] 908.5 Repair garages. A flammable-gas detection system
shall be provided in repair garages for vehicles fueled by
nonodorized gases in accordance with Section 406.6.6.
[F] 908.6 Refrigerant detector. Machinery rooms shall con-
tain a refrigerant detector with an audible and visual alarm. The
detector, or a sampling tube that draws air to the detector, shall
be located in an area where refrigerant from a leak will concen-
trate. The alarm shall be actuated at a value not greater than the
corresponding TLV-TWA values for the refrigerant classifica-
tion indicated in the International Mechanical Code. Detectors
and alarms shall be placed in approved locations.

SECTION 909
SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEMS

[F] 909.1 Scope and purpose. This section applies to mechan-
ical or passive smoke control systems when they are required
by other provisions of this code. The purpose of this section is
to establish minimum requirements for the design, installation
and acceptance testing of smoke control systems that are
intended to provide a tenable environment for the evacuation or
relocation of occupants. These provisions are not intended for
the preservation of contents, the timely restoration of opera-
tions or for assistance in fire suppression or overhaul activities.
Smoke control systems regulated by this section serve a differ-
ent purpose than the smoke- and heat-venting provisions found
in Section 910. Mechanical smoke control systems shall not be
considered exhaust systems under Chapter 5 of the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.

[F] 909.2 General design requirements. Buildings, structures
or parts thereof required by this code to have a smoke control
system or systems shall have such systems designed in accor-

204

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:27 PM

24

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

dance with the applicable requirements of Section 909 and the
generally accepted and well-established principles of engi-
neering relevant to the design. The construction documents
shall include sufficient information and detail to adequately
describe the elements of the design necessary for the proper
implementation of the smoke control systems. These docu-
ments shall be accompanied by sufficient information and
analysis to demonstrate compliance with these provisions.
[F] 909.3 Special inspection and test requirements. In addi-
tion to the ordinary inspection and test requirements which
buildings, structures and parts thereof are required to undergo,
smoke control systems subject to the provisions of Section 909
shall undergo special inspections and tests sufficient to verify
the proper commissioning of the smoke control design in its
final installed condition. The design submission accompany-
ing the construction documents shall clearly detail procedures
and methods to be used and the items subject to such inspec-
tions and tests. Such commissioning shall be in accordance
with generally accepted engineering practice and, where possi-
ble, based on published standards for the particular testing
involved. The special inspections and tests required by this sec-
tion shall be conducted under the same terms in Section 1704.
[F] 909.4 Analysis. A rational analysis supporting the types of
smoke control systems to be employed, their methods of opera-
tion, the systems supporting them and the methods of construc-
tion to be utilized shall accompany the submitted construction
documents and shall include, but not be limited to, the items
indicated in Sections 909.4.1 through 909.4.6.
[F] 909.4.1 Stack effect. The system shall be designed such
that the maximum probable normal or reverse stack effect
will not adversely interfere with the system’s capabilities. In
determining the maximum probable stack effect, altitude,
elevation, weather history and interior temperatures shall be
used.
[F] 909.4.2 Temperature effect of fire. Buoyancy and
expansion caused by the design fire in accordance with Sec-
tion 909.9 shall be analyzed. The system shall be designed
such that these effects do not adversely interfere with the
system’s capabilities.
[F] 909.4.3 Wind effect. The design shall consider the
adverse effects of wind. Such consideration shall be consis-
tent with the wind-loading provisions of Chapter 16.
[F] 909.4.4 HVAC systems. The design shall consider the
effects of the heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
(HVAC) systems on both smoke and fire transport. The
analysis shall include all permutations of systems status.
The design shall consider the effects of the fire on the HVAC
systems.
[F] 909.4.5 Climate. The design shall consider the effects
of low temperatures on systems, property and occupants.
Air inlets and exhausts shall be located so as to prevent snow
or ice blockage.
[F] 909.4.6 Duration of operation. All portions of active or
passive smoke control systems shall be capable of continued
operation after detection of the fire event for a period of not
less than either 20 minutes or 1.5 times the calculated egress
time, whichever is less.

[F] 909.5 Smoke barrier construction. Smoke barriers shall
comply with Section 710, and shall be constructed and sealed
to limit leakage areas exclusive of protected openings. The
maximum allowable leakage area shall be the aggregate area
calculated using the following leakage area ratios:
A/Aw = 0.00100
A/Aw = 0.00035
A/Aw = 0.00150
A/AF = 0.00050

4. Floors and roofs:

1. Walls:

2. Exit enclosures:

3. All other shafts:

where:
A = Total leakage area, square feet (m2).
AF = Unit floor or roof area of barrier, square feet (m2).
Aw = Unit wall area of barrier, square feet (m2).
The leakage area ratios shown do not include openings due
to doors, operable windows or similar gaps. These shall be
included in calculating the total leakage area.

[F] 909.5.1 Leakage area. The total leakage area of the bar-
rier is the product of the smoke barrier gross area multiplied
by the allowable leakage area ratio, plus the area of other
openings such as gaps and operable windows. Compliance
shall be determined by achieving the minimum air pressure
difference across the barrier with the system in the smoke
control mode for mechanical smoke control systems. Pas-
sive smoke control systems tested using other approved
means such as door fan testing shall be as approved by the
fire code official.

[F] 909.5.2 Opening protection. Openings in smoke barri-
ers shall be protected by automatic-closing devices actuated
by the required controls for the mechanical smoke control
system. Door openings shall be protected by fire door
assemblies complying with Section 715.4.3.

Exceptions:

1. P a s s i v e sm o k e c o n t r o l s y s t em s w i t h a u t o-
ma t ic-c los ing dev ices ac tua ted by spo t- type
smoke de tec to rs l is ted fo r re leas ing se rv ice
installed in accordance with Section 907.3.
2. Fixed openings between smoke zones that are pro-
tected utilizing the airflow method.
3. In Group I-2, where such doors are installed across
corridors, a pair of opposite-swinging doors with-
out a center mullion shall be installed having
vision panels with fire protection-rated glazing
materials in fire protection-rated frames, the area
of which shall not exceed that tested. The doors
shall be close-fitting within operational tolerances
and shall not have undercuts, louvers or grilles.
The doors shall have head and jamb stops, astra-
gals or rabbets at meeting edges and shall be auto-
matic-closing by smoke detection in accordance
with Section 715.4.8.3. Positive-latching devices
are not required.
4. Group I-3.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

205

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:27 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

5. Openings between smoke zones with clear ceiling
heights of 14 feet (4267 mm) or greater and
bank-down capacity of greater than 20 minutes as
determined by the design fire size.
[F] 909.5.2.1 Ducts and air transfer openings. Ducts
and air transfer openings are required to be protected
with a minimum Class II, 250°F (121°C) smoke damper
complying with Section 716.
[F] 909.6 Pressurization method. The primary mechanical
means of controlling smoke shall be by pressure differences
across smoke barriers. Maintenance of a tenable environment
is not required in the smoke control zone of fire origin.
[F] 909.6.1 Minimum pressure difference. The minimum
pressure difference across a smoke barrier shall be
0.05-inch water gage (0.0124 kPa) in fully sprinklered
buildings.
In buildings permitted to be other than fully sprinklered,
the smoke control system shall be designed to achieve pres-
sure differences at least two times the maximum calculated
pressure difference produced by the design fire.
[F] 909.6.2 Maximum pressure difference. The maxi-
mum air pressure difference across a smoke barrier shall be
determined by required door-opening or closing forces. The
actual force required to open exit doors when the system is
in the smoke control mode shall be in accordance with Sec-
tion 1008.1.2. Opening and closing forces for other doors
shall be determined by standard engineering methods for
the resolution of forces and reactions. The calculated force
to set a side-hinged, swinging door in motion shall be deter-
mined by:

(Equation 9-1)

F = Fdc + K(WADP)/2(W- d)
where:
A = Door area, square feet (m2).
d = Distance from door handle to latch edge of door, feet
(m).
F = Total door opening force, pounds (N).
Fdc = Force required to overcome closing device, pounds
(N).
K = Coefficient 5.2 (1.0).
W = Door width, feet (m).
DP = Design pressure difference, inches of water (Pa).
[F] 909.7 Airflow design method. When approved by the fire
code official, smoke migration through openings fixed in a per-
manently open position, which are located between smoke
control zones by the use of the airflow method, shall be permit-
ted. The design airflow shall be in accordance with this section.
Airflow shall be directed to limit smoke migration from the fire
zone. The geometry of openings shall be considered to prevent
flow reversal from turbulent effects.
[F] 909.7.1 Velocity. The minimum average velocity
through a fixed opening shall not be less than:

v = 217.2 [h (Tf - To)/(Tf + 460)]1/2

(Equation 9-2)

For SI: v = 119.9 [h (Tf - To)/Tf]1/2
where:
h = Height of opening, feet (m).
Tf = Temperature of smoke, °F (K).
To = Temperature of ambient air, °F (K).
v = Air velocity, feet per minute (m/minute).
[F] 909.7.2 Prohibited conditions. This method shall not
be employed where either the quantity of air or the velocity
of the airflow will adversely affect other portions of the
smoke control system, unduly intensify the fire, disrupt
plume dynamics or interfere with exiting. In no case shall
airflow toward the fire exceed 200 feet per minute (1.02
m/s). Where the formula in Section 909.7.1 requires airflow
to exceed this limit, the airflow method shall not be used.
[F] 909.8 Exhaust method. When approved by the fire code
official, mechanical smoke control for large enclosed volumes,
such as in atriums or malls, shall be permitted to utilize the
exhaust method. Smoke control systems using the exhaust
method shall be designed in accordance with NFPA 92B.
[F] 909.8.1 Smoke layer. The height of the lowest horizon-
tal surface of the smoke layer interface shall be maintained
at least 6 feet (1829 mm) above any walking surface that
forms a portion of a required egress system within the
smoke zone.
[F] 909.9 Design fire. The design fire shall be based on a ratio-
nal analysis performed by the registered design professional
and approved by the fire code official. The design fire shall be
based on the analysis in accordance with Section 909.4 and this
section.
[F] 909.9.1 Factors considered. The engineering analysis
shall include the characteristics of the fuel, fuel load, effects
included by the fire and whether the fire is likely to be steady
or unsteady.
[F] 909.9.2 Separation distance. Determination of the
design fire shall include consideration of the type of fuel,
fuel spacing and configuration.
[F] 909.9.3 Heat-release assumptions. The analysis shall
make use of best available data from approved sources and
shall not be based on excessively stringent limitations of
combustible material.
[F] 909.9.4 Sprinkler effectiveness assumptions. A docu-
mented engineering analysis shall be provided for condi-
tions that assume fire growth is halted at the time of
sprinkler activation.
[F] 909.10 Equipment. Equipment including, but not limited
to, fans, ducts, automatic dampers and balance dampers, shall
be suitable for its intended use, suitable for the probable expo-
sure temperatures that the rational analysis indicates and as
approved by the fire code official.

206

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:28 PM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 909.10.1 Exhaust fans. Components of exhaust fans
shall be rated and certified by the manufacturer for the prob-
able temperature rise to which the components will be
exposed. This temperature rise shall be computed by:

(Equation 9-3)

Ts = (Qc/mc) + (Ta)
where:
c = Specific heat of smoke at smoke layer temperature,
Btu/lb°F (kJ/kg × K).
m = Exhaust rate, pounds per second (kg/s).
Qc = Convective heat output of fire, Btu/s (kW).
Ta = Ambient temperature, °F (K).
Ts = Smoke temperature, °F (K).
Exception: Reduced Ts as calculated based on the assur-
ance of adequate dilution air.
[F] 909.10.2 Ducts. Duct materials and joints shall be capa-
ble of withstanding the probable temperatures and pressures
to which they are exposed as determined in accordance with
Section 909.10.1. Ducts shall be constructed and supported
in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.
Ducts shall be leak tested to 1.5 times the maximum design
pressure in accordance with nationally accepted practices.
Measured leakage shall not exceed 5 percent of design flow.
Results of such testing shall be a part of the documentation
procedure. Ducts shall be supported directly from fire-resis-
tance-rated structural elements of the building by substan-
tial, noncombustible supports.
Exception: Flexible connections (for the purpose of
vibration isolation) complying with the International
Mechanical Code, that are constructed of approved
fire-resistance-rated materials.
[F] 909.10.3 Equipment, inlets and outlets. Equipment
shall be located so as to not expose uninvolved portions of
the building to an additional fire hazard. Outside air inlets
shall be located so as to minimize the potential for introduc-
ing smoke or flame into the building. Exhaust outlets shall
be so located as to minimize reintroduction of smoke into
the building and to limit exposure of the building or adjacent
buildings to an additional fire hazard.
[F] 909.10.4 Automatic dampers. Automatic dampers,
regardless of the purpose for which they are installed within
the smoke control system, shall be listed and conform to the
requirements of approved, recognized standards.
[F] 909.10.5 Fans. In addition to other requirements,
belt-driven fans shall have 1.5 times the number of belts
required for the design duty, with the minimum number of
belts being two. Fans shall be selected for stable perfor-
mance based on normal temperature and, where applicable,
elevated temperature. Calculations and manufacturer’s fan
curves shall be part of the documentation procedures. Fans
shall be supported and restrained by noncombustible
devices in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.
Motors driving fans shall not be operated beyond their
nameplate horsepower (kilowatts), as determined from
measurement of actual current draw, and shall have a mini-
mum service factor of 1.15.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 909.11 Power systems. The smoke control system shall be
supplied with two sources of power. Primary power shall be
from the normal building power systems. Secondary power
shall be from an approved standby source complying with
Chapter 27 of this code. The standby power source and its
transfer switches shall be in a room separate from the normal
power transformers and switch gears and ventilated directly to
and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with not less
than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance
with Section 712, or both.
[F] 909.11.1 Power sources and power surges. Elements
of the smoke management system relying on volatile mem-
ories or the like shall be supplied with uninterruptable
power sources of sufficient duration to span a 15-minute pri-
mary power interruption. Elements of the smoke manage-
ment system susceptible to power surges shall be suitably
protected by conditioners, suppressors or other approved
means.
[F] 909.12 Detection and control systems. Fire detection sys-
tems providing control input or output signals to mechanical
smoke control systems or elements thereof shall comply with
the requirements of Section 907. Such systems shall be
equipped with a control unit complying with UL 864 and listed
as smoke control equipment.
Control systems for mechanical smoke control systems shall
include provisions for verification. Verification shall include
positive confirmation of actuation, testing, manual override,
the presence of power downstream of all disconnects and,
through a preprogrammed weekly test sequence, report abnor-
mal conditions audibly, visually and by printed report.
[F] 909.12.1 Wiring. In addition to meeting requirements
of NFPA 70, all wiring, regardless of voltage, shall be fully
enclosed within continuous raceways.
[F] 909.12.2 Activation. Smoke control systems shall be
activated in accordance with this section.

[F] 909.12.2.1 Pressurization, airflow or exhaust
method. Mechanical smoke control systems using the
pressurization, airflow or exhaust method shall have
completely automatic control.
[F] 909.12.2.2 Passive method. Passive smoke control
systems actuated by approved spot-type detectors listed
for releasing service shall be permitted.
[F] 909.12.3 Automatic control. Where completely auto-
matic control is required or used, the automatic-control
sequences shall be initiated from an appropriately zoned
automatic sprinkler
system complying with Section
903.3.1.1, manual controls that are readily accessible to the
fire department and any smoke detectors required by engi-
neering analysis.
[F] 909.13 Control air tubing. Control air tubing shall be of
sufficient size to meet the required response times. Tubing shall
be flushed clean and dry prior to final connections and shall be
adequately supported and protected from damage. Tubing
passing through concrete or masonry shall be sleeved and pro-
tected from abrasion and electrolytic action.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

207

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:28 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 909.13.1 Materials. Control-air tubing shall be hard-
drawn copper, Type L, ACR in accordance with ASTM B
42, ASTM B 43, ASTM B 68, ASTM B 88, ASTM B 251
and ASTM B 280. Fittings shall be wrought copper or brass,
solder type in accordance with ASME B 16.18 or ASME
B16.22. Changes in direction shall be made with appropri-
ate tool bends. Brass compression-type fittings shall be used
at final connection to devices; other joints shall be brazed
using a BCuP5 brazing alloy with solidus above 1,100ºF
(593ºC) and liquids below 1,500ºF (816ºC). Brazing flux
shall be used on copper-to-brass joints only.
Exception: Nonmetallic tubing used within control pan-
els and at the final connection to devices provided all of
the following conditions are met:
1. Tubing shall be listed by an approved agency for
flame and smoke characteristics.
2. Tubing and connected devices shall be completely
enclosed within a galvanized or paint-grade steel
enclosure having a minimum thickness of 0.0296
inch (0.7534 mm) (No. 22 gage). Entry to the
enclosure shall be by copper tubing with a protec-
tive grommet of neoprene or teflon or by suitable
brass compression to male barbed adapter.
3. Tubing shall be identified by appropriately docu-
mented coding.
4. Tubing shall be neatly tied and supported within
the enclosure. Tubing bridging cabinets and doors
or moveable devices shall be of sufficient length to
avoid tension and excessive stress. Tubing shall be
p ro te c ted ag a in s t ab r a s ion . Tub ing s e rv ing
devices on doors shall be fastened along hinges.
[F] 909.13.2 Isolation from other functions. Control tub-
ing serving other than smoke control functions shall be iso-
lated by automatic isolation valves or shall be an
independent system.
[F] 909.13.3 Testing. Control air tubing shall be tested at
three times the operating pressure for not less than 30 min-
utes without any noticeable loss in gauge pressure prior to
final connection to devices.
[F] 909.14 Marking and identification. The detection and
control systems shall be clearly marked at all junctions,
accesses and terminations.
[F] 909.15 Control diagrams. Identical control diagrams
showing all devices in the system and identifying their location
and function shall be maintained current and kept on file with
the fire code official, the fire department and in the fire com-
mand center in a format and manner approved by the fire chief.
[ F ] 9 0 9 . 1 6 F i r e - f i g h t e r ’s sm o k e c o n t ro l p a n e l . A
fire-fighter’s smoke control panel for fire department emer-
gency response purposes only shall be provided and shall
include manual control or override of automatic control for
mechanical smoke control systems. The panel shall be located
in a fire command center complying with Section 911 in high-
rise buildings or buildings with smoke-protected assembly
seating. In all other buildings, the fire-fighter’s smoke control
panel shall be installed in an approved location adjacent to the

fire alarm control panel. The fire-fighter’s smoke control panel
shall comply with Sections 909.16.1 through 909.16.3.
[F] 909.16.1 Smoke control systems. Fans within the
building shall be shown on the fire-fighter’s control panel. A
clear indication of the direction of airflow and the relation-
ship of components shall be displayed. Status indicators
shall be provided for all smoke control equipment, annunci-
ated by fan and zone, and by pilot-lamp-type indicators as
follows:
1. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their
normal status—WHITE.
2. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their
off or closed status—RED.
3. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their
on or open status—GREEN.
4. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in a
fault status—YELLOW/AMBER.
[F] 909.16.2 Smoke control panel. The fire-fighter’s con-
trol panel shall provide control capability over the complete
smoke-control system equipment within the building as fol-
lows:
1. ON-AUTO-OFF control over each individual piece
of operating smoke control equipment that can also be
controlled from other sources within the building.
This includes stairway pressurization fans; smoke
exhaust fans; supply, return and exhaust fans; eleva-
tor shaft fans and other operating equipment used or
intended for smoke control purposes.
2. OPEN -AUTO -CLOSE con t ro l ov e r ind iv idu a l
dampers relating to smoke control and that are also
controlled from other sources within the building.
3. ON-OFF or OPEN-CLOSE control over smoke con-
trol and other critical equipment associated with a fire
or smoke emergency and that can only be controlled
from the fire-fighter’s control panel.
Exceptions:
1. Complex systems, where approved, where the
controls and indicators are combined to control
and indicate all elements of a single smoke zone as
a unit.
2. Complex systems, where approved, where the
control is accomplished by computer interface
using approved, plain English commands.
[F] 909.16.3 Control action and priorities. The fire-
fighter’s control panel actions shall be as follows:
1. ON-OFF and OPEN-CLOSE control actions shall
have the highest priority of any control point within
the building. Once issued from the fire-fighter’s con-
trol panel, no automatic or manual control from any
other control point within the building shall contra-
dict the control action. Where automatic means are
provided to interrupt normal, nonemergency equip-
ment operation or produce a specific result to safe-
guard the building or equipment (i.e., duct freezestats,
duct smoke detectors, high-temperature cutouts, tem-

208

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:28 PM

28

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

perature-actuated linkage and similar devices), such
means shall be capable of being overridden by the
fire-fighter’s control panel. The last control action as
indicated by each fire-fighter’s control panel switch
position shall prevail. In no case shall control actions
require the smoke control system to assume more
than one configuration at any one time.
Exception: Power disconnects required by NFPA
70.
2. Only the AUTO position of each three-position
fire-fighter’s control panel switch shall allow auto-
matic or manual control action from other control
points within the building. The AUTO position shall
be the NORMAL, nonemergency, building control
position. Where a fire-fighter’s control panel is in the
AUTO position, the actual status of the device (on,
off, open, closed) shall continue to be indicated by the
status indicator described above. When directed by an
automatic signal to assume an emergency condition,
the NORMAL position shall become the emergency
condition for that device or group of devices within
the zone. In no case shall control actions require the
smoke control system to assume more than one con-
figuration at any one time.
[F] 909.17 System response time. Smoke-control system acti-
vation shall be initiated immediately after receipt of an appro-
priate automatic or manual activation command. Smoke
control systems shall activate individual components (such as
dampers and fans) in the sequence necessary to prevent physi-
cal damage to the fans, dampers, ducts and other equipment.
For purposes of smoke control, the fire-fighter’s control panel
response time shall be the same for automatic or manual smoke
control action initiated from any other building control point.
The total response time, including that necessary for detection,
shutdown of operating equipment and smoke control system
startup, shall allow for full operational mode to be achieved
before the conditions in the space exceed the design smoke
condition. The system response time for each component and
their sequential relationships shall be detailed in the required
rational analysis and verification of their installed condition
reported in the required final report.
[F] 909.18 Acceptance testing. Devices, equipment, compo-
nents and sequences shall be individually tested. These tests, in
addition to those required by other provisions of this code, shall
consist of determination of function, sequence and, where
applicable, capacity of their installed condition.
[F] 909.18.1 Detection devices. Smoke or fire detectors
that are a part of a smoke control system shall be tested in
accordance with Chapter 9 in their installed condition.
When applicable, this testing shall include verification of
airflow in both minimum and maximum conditions.
[F] 909.18.2 Ducts. Ducts that are part of a smoke control
system shall be traversed using generally accepted practices
to determine actual air quantities.
[F] 909.18.3 Dampers. Dampers shall be tested for func-
tion in their installed condition.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 909.18.4 Inlets and outlets. Inlets and outlets shall be
read using generally accepted practices to determine air
quantities.
[F] 909.18.5 Fans. Fans shall be examined for correct rota-
tion. Measurements of voltage, amperage, revolutions per
minute (rpm) and belt tension shall be made.
[F] 909.18.6 Smoke barriers. Measurements using
inclined manometers or other approved calibrated measur-
ing devices shall be made of the pressure differences across
smoke barriers. Such measurements shall be conducted for
each possible smoke control condition.
[F] 909.18.7 Controls. Each smoke zone equipped with an
automatic-initiation device shall be put into operation by the
actuation of one such device. Each additional device within
the zone shall be verified to cause the same sequence with-
out requiring the operation of fan motors in order to prevent
damage. Control sequences shall be verified throughout the
system,
including verification of override from the
fire-fighter’s control panel and simulation of standby power
conditions.
[F] 909.18.8 Special
inspections for smoke control.
Smoke control systems shall be tested by a special inspector.
[F] 909.18.8.1 Scope of testing. Special inspections
shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
1. During erection of ductwork and prior to conceal-
ment for the purposes of leakage testing and
recording of device location.
2. Prior to occupancy and after sufficient completion
for the purposes of pressure-difference testing,
flow measurements, and detection and control ver-
ification.
[F] 909.18.8.2 Qualifications. Special inspection agen-
cies for smoke control shall have expertise in fire protec-
t i o n e n g i n e e r i n g , m e c h a n i c a l e n g i n e e r i n g a n d
certification as air balancers.
[F] 909.18.8.3 Reports. A complete report of testing
shall be prepared by the special inspector or special
inspection agency. The report shall include identification
of all devices by manufacturer, nameplate data, design
values, measured values and identification tag or mark.
The report shall be reviewed by the responsible regis-
tered design professional and, when satisfied that the
design intent has been achieved, the responsible regis-
tered design professional shall seal, sign and date the
report.
[F] 909.18.8.3.1 Report filing. A copy of the final
report shall be filed with the fire code official and an
identical copy shall be maintained in an approved
location at the building.
[F] 909.18.9 Identification and documentation. Charts,
drawings and other documents identifying and locating
each component of the smoke control system, and describ-
ing its proper function and maintenance requirements, shall
be maintained on file at the building as an attachment to the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

209

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:29 PM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

report required by Section 909.18.8.3. Devices shall have an
approved identifying tag or mark on them consistent with
the other required documentation and shall be dated indicat-
ing the last time they were successfully tested and by whom.

[F] 909.19 System acceptance. Buildings, or portions thereof,
required by this code to comply with this section shall not be
issued a certificate of occupancy until such time that the fire
code official determines that the provisions of this section have
been fully complied with and that the fire department has
received satisfactory instruction on the operation, both auto-
matic and manual, of the system.

Exception: In buildings of phased construction, a tempo-
rary certificate of occupancy, as approved by the fire code
official, shall be allowed provided that those portions of the
building to be occupied meet the requirements of this sec-
tion and that the remainder does not pose a significant haz-
ard to the safety of the proposed occupants or adjacent
buildings.

909.20 Smokeproof enclosures. Where required by Section
1022.9, a smokeproof enclosure shall be constructed in accor-
dance with this section. A smokeproof enclosure shall consist
of an enclosed interior exit stairway that conforms to Section
1022.1 and an open exterior balcony or ventilated vestibule
meeting the requirements of this section. Where access to the
roof is required by the International Fire Code, such access
shall be from the smokeproof enclosure where a smokeproof
enclosure is required.

909.20.1 Access. Access to the stair shall be by way of a
vestibule or an open exterior balcony. The minimum dimen-
sion of the vestibule shall not be less than the required width
of the corridor leading to the vestibule but shall not have a
width of less than 44 inches (1118 mm) and shall not have a
length of less than 72 inches (1829 mm) in the direction of
egress travel.

909.20.2 Construction. The smokeproof enclosure shall be
separated from the remainder of the building by not less
than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accor-
dance with Section 712, or both. Openings are not permitted
other than the required means of egress doors. The vestibule
shall be separated from the stairway by not less than 2-hour
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 712, or both. The open exterior balcony shall be con-
structed in accordance with the fire-resistance rating re-
quirements for floor assemblies.

909.20.2.1 Door closers. Doors in a smokeproof enclo-
sure shall be self- or automatic closing by actuation of a
smoke detector in accordance with Section 715.4 and
shall be installed at the floor-side entrance to the
smokeproof enclosure. The actuation of the smoke
detector on any door shall activate the closing devices on
all doors in the smokeproof enclosure at all levels.
Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.3.

909.20.3 Natural ventilation alternative. The provisions
of Sections 909.20.3.1 through 909.20.3.3 shall apply to
ventilation of smokeproof enclosures by natural means.
909.20.3.1 Balcony doors. Where access to the stairway
is by way of an open exterior balcony, the door assembly
into the enclosure shall be a fire door assembly in accor-
dance with Section 715.4.
909.20.3.2 Vestibule doors. Where access to the stair-
way is by way of a vestibule, the door assembly into the
vestibule shall be a fire door assembly complying with
Section 715.4. The door assembly from the vestibule to
the stairway shall have not less than a 20-minute fire pro-
tection rating complying with Section 715.4.
909.20.3.3 Vestibule ventilation. Each vestibule shall
have a minimum net area of 16 square feet (1.5 m2) of
opening in a wall facing an outer court, yard or public
way that is at least 20 feet (6096 mm) in width.
909.20.4 Mechanical ventilation alternative. The provi-
sions of Sections 909.20.4.1 through 909.20.4.4 shall apply
to ventilation of smokeproof enclosures by mechanical
means.
909.20.4.1 Vestibule doors. The door assembly from the
building into the vestibule shall be a fire door assembly
complying with Section 715.4.3. The door assembly
from the vestibule to the stairway shall not have less than
a 20-minute fire protection rating and meet the require-
ments for a smoke door assembly in accordance with
Section 715.4.3. The door shall be installed in accor-
dance with NFPA 105.
909.20.4.2 Vestibule ventilation. The vestibule shall be
supplied with not less than one air change per minute and
the exhaust shall not be less than 150 percent of supply.
Supply air shall enter and exhaust air shall discharge
from the vestibule through separate, tightly constructed
ducts used only for that purpose. Supply air shall enter
the vestibule within 6 inches (152 mm) of the floor level.
The top of the exhaust register shall be located at the top
of the smoke trap but not more than 6 inches (152 mm)
down from the top of the trap, and shall be entirely within
the smoke trap area. Doors in the open position shall not
obstruct duct openings. Duct openings with controlling
dampers are permitted where necessary to meet the
design requirements, but dampers are not otherwise
required.
909.20.4.2.1 Engineered ventilation system. Where
a specially engineered system is used, the system
shall exhaust a quantity of air equal to not less than 90
air changes per hour from any vestibule in the emer-
gency operation mode and shall be sized to handle
three vestibules simultaneously. Smoke detectors
shall be located at the floor-side entrance to each ves-
tibule and shall activate the system for the affected
vestibule. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accor-
dance with Section 907.3.
909.20.4.3 Smoke trap. The vestibule ceiling shall be at
least 20 inches (508 mm) higher than the door opening

210

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:29 PM

30

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

into the vestibule to serve as a smoke and heat trap and to
provide an upward-moving air column. The height shall
not be decreased unless approved and justified by design
and test.
909.20.4.4 Stair shaft air movement system. The stair
shaft shall be provided with a dampered relief opening
and supplied with sufficient air to maintain a minimum
positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water (25 Pa) in the shaft
relative to the vestibule with all doors closed.
909.20.5 Stair pressurization alternative. Where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the vesti-
bule is not required, provided that interior exit stairways are
pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa)
and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft
relative to the building measured with all stairway doors
closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack
effect and wind effect.
909.20.6 Ventilating equipment. The activation of venti-
lating equipment required by the alternatives in Sections
909.20.4 and 909.20.5 shall be by smoke detectors installed
at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to
the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the
stair shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detec-
tion or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall acti-
vate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section
907.3.
909.20.6.1 Ventilation systems. Smokeproof enclosure
ventilation systems shall be independent of other build-
ing ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring,
power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the
following:
1. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and
ductwork shall be located exterior to the building
and directly connected to the smokeproof enclo-
sure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by
ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire
barriers constructed in accordance with Section
707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accor-
dance with Section 712, or both.
2. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and
ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof
enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and
to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not
less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both.
3. Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and
ductwork shall be located within the building if
separated from the remainder of the building,
including other mechanical equipment, by not less
than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a
2-hour rated cable or cable system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51
mm) of concrete.
909.20.6.2 Standby power. Mechanical vestibule and
stair shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detec-
tion systems shall be powered by an approved standby
power system conforming to Section 403.4.7 and Chap-
ter 27.
909.20.6.3 Acceptance and testing. Before the mechan-
ical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in
the presence of the building official to confirm that the
system is operating in compliance with these require-
ments.

SECTION 910
SMOKE AND HEAT VENTS

[F] 910.1 General. Where required by this code or otherwise
installed, smoke and heat vents, or mechanical smoke exhaust
systems, and draft curtains shall conform to the requirements
of this section.
Exceptions:
1. Frozen food warehouses used solely for storage of
Class I and II commodities where protected by an
approved automatic sprinkler system.
2. Where areas of buildings are equipped with early sup-
pression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, automatic
smoke and heat vents shall not be required within
these areas.
[F] 910.2 Where required. Smoke and heat vents shall be
installed in the roofs of one-story buildings or portions thereof
occupied for the uses set forth in Sections 910.2.1 and 910.2.2.
[F] 910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1. Buildings and portions
thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more
than 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) in undivided area.
Exception: Group S-1 aircraft repair hangars.
[F] 910.2.2 High-piled combustible storage. Buildings
and portions thereof containing high-piled combustible
stock or rack storage in any occupancy group in accordance
with Section 413 and the International Fire Code.
[F] 910.3 Design and installation. The design and installation
of smoke and heat vents and draft curtains shall be as specified
in Sections 910.3.1 through 910.3.5.2 and Table 910.3.
[F] 910.3.1 Design. Smoke and heat vents shall be listed and
labeled to indicate compliance with UL 793.
[F] 910.3.2 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be
capable of being operated by approved automatic and man-
ual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

211

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:30 PM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1
through 910.3.2.3.
[F] 910.3.2.1 Gravity-operated drop-out vents. Auto-
matic smoke and heat vents containing heat-sensitive
glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent open-
ing when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 min-
utes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire,
represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches
an air temperature of 500°F (260°C) within 5 minutes.
[F] 910.3.2.2 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in
buildings provided with an approved automatic sprin-
kler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to
operate automatically.
[F ] 910 .3 .2 .3 Non spr ink lered bu i ld ing s . Whe re
installed in buildings not provided with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall
operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive
device rated at between 100°F (38°C) and 220°F
(104°C) above ambient.
Exception: Gravity-operated drop-out vents comply-
ing with Section 910.3.2.1.
[F] 910.3.3 Vent dimensions. The effective venting area
shall not be less than 16 square feet (1.5 m2) with no dimen-

sion less than 4 feet (1219 mm), excluding ribs or gutters
having a total width not exceeding 6 inches (152 mm).
[F] 910.3.4 Vent locations. Smoke and heat vents shall be
located 20 feet (6096 mm) or more from adjacent lot lines
and fire walls and 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from fire bar-
riers. Vents shall be uniformly located within the roof in the
areas of the building where the vents are required to be
installed by Section 910.2 with consideration given to roof
pitch, draft curtain location, sprinkler location and struc-
tural members.
[F] 910.3.5 Draft curtains. Where required by Table 910.3,
draft curtains shall be installed on the underside of the roof
in accordance with this section.
Exception: Where areas of buildings are equipped with
ESFR sprinklers, draft curtains shall not be provided
within these areas. Draft curtains shall only be provided
at the separation between the ESFR sprinklers and the
non-ESFR sprinklers.
[F] 910.3.5.1 Construction. Draft curtains shall be con-
structed of sheet metal, lath and plaster, gypsum board or
other approved materials which provide equivalent per-
formance to resist the passage of smoke. Joints and con-
nections shall be smoke tight.

[F] TABLE 910.3
REQUIREMENTS FOR DRAFT CURTAINS AND SMOKE AND HEAT VENTSa

OCCUPANCY GROUP AND
COMMODITY
CLASSIFICATION

DESIGNATED
STORAGE HEIGHT
(feet)

MINIMUM DRAFT
CURTAIN DEPTH
(feet)

MAXIMUM AREA
FORMED BY DRAFT
CURTAINS
(square feet)

VENT-AREA-
TO-FLOOR-AREA
RATIOc

MAXIMUM
SPACING OF
VENT CENTERS
(feet)

MAXIMUM
DISTANCE FROM
VENTS TO WALL
OR DRAFT
CURTAINb
(feet)

Group F-1 and S-1

High-piled Storage
(see Section 910.2.2)
Class I-IV commodities
(Option 1)

High-piled Storage
(see Section 910.2.2)
Class I-IV commodities
(Option 2)

High-piled Storage
(see Section 910.2.2)
High-hazard commodities
(Option 1)

High-piled Storage
(see Section 910.2.2)
High-hazard commodities
(Option 2)

—

£ 20

> 20 £ 40

£ 20

> 20 £ 40

£ 20

> 20 £ 30

£ 20

> 20 £ 30

0.2 ´ Hd
but ³ 4

6

6

4

4

6

6

4

4

50,000

10,000

8,000

3,000

3,000

6,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

1:100

1:100

1:75

1:75

1:50

1:50

1:40

1:50

1:30

120

100

100

100

100

100

90

100

75

60

60

55

55

50

50

45

50

40

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. Additional requirements for rack storage heights in excess of those indicated shall be in accordance with Chapter 23. For solid-piled storage heights in excess of
those indicated, an approved engineered design shall be used.
b. Vents adjacent to walls or draft curtains shall be located within a horizontal distance not greater than the maximum distance specified in this column as measured
perpendicular to the wall or draft curtain that forms the perimeter of the draft curtained area.
c. Where draft curtains are not required, the vent area to floor area ratio shall be calculated based on a minimum draft curtain depth of 6 feet (Option 1).
d. “H” is the height of the vent, in feet, above the floor.

212

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:30 PM

32

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

[F] 910.3.5.2 Location and depth. The location and
minimum depth of draft curtains shall be in accordance
with Table 910.3.

[F] 911.1.1 Location and access. The location and accessi-
bility of the fire command center shall be approved by the
fire chief.

[F] 910.4 Mechanical smoke exhaust. Where approved by the
fire code official, engineered mechanical smoke exhaust shall
be an acceptable alternate to smoke and heat vents.

[F] 910.4.1 Location. Exhaust fans shall be uniformly
spaced within each draft-curtained area and the maximum
distance between fans shall not be greater than 100 feet (30
480 mm).

[F] 910.4.2 Size. Fans shall have a maximum individual
capacity of 30,000 cfm (14.2 m3/s). The aggregate capacity
of smoke exhaust fans shall be determined by the equation:

C = A × 300

(Equation 9-4)

where:
C = Capacity of mechanical ventilation required, in cubic
feet per minute (m3/s).
A = Area of roof vents provided in square feet (m2) in
accordance with Table 910.3.
[F] 910.4.3 Operation. Mechanical smoke exhaust fans
shall be automatically activated by the automatic sprinkler
system or by heat detectors having operating characteris-
tics equivalent to those described in Section 910.3.2. Indi-
vidual manual controls of each fan unit shall also be
provided.

[F] 910.4.4 Wiring and control. Wiring for operation and
control of smoke exhaust fans shall be connected ahead of
the main disconnect and protected against exposure to tem-
peratures in excess of 1,000°F (538°C) for a period of not
less than 15 minutes. Controls shall be located so as to be
immediately accessible to the fire service from the exterior
of the building and protected against interior fire exposure
by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both.

[F] 910.4.5 Supply air. Supply air for exhaust fans shall be
provided at or near the floor level and shall be sized to pro-
vide a minimum of 50 percent of required exhaust. Open-
ings for supply air shall be uniformly distributed around the
periphery of the area served.

[F] 910.4.6 Interlocks. In combination comfort air-han-
dling/smoke removal systems or independent comfort
air-handling systems, fans shall be controlled to shut down
in accordance with the approved smoke control sequence.

SECTION 911
FIRE COMMAND CENTER

[F] 911.1 General. Where required by other sections of this
code and in all buildings classified as high-rise buildings by
this code, a fire command center for fire department operations
shall be provided and shall comply with Sections 911.1.1
through 911.1.5.

[F] 911.1.2 Separation. The fire command center shall be
separated from the remainder of the building by not less
than a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assembly constructed in accor-
dance with Section 712, or both.

[F] 911.1.3 Size. The room shall be a minimum of 200
square feet (19 m2) with a minimum dimension of 10 feet
(3048 mm).

[F] 911.1.4 Layout approval. A layout of the fire command
center and all features required by this section to be con-
tained therein shall be submitted for approval prior to instal-
lation.

[F] 911.1.5 Required features. The fire command center
shall comply with NFPA 72 and shall contain the following
features:

1. The emergency voice/alarm communication system
control unit.
2. The fire department communications system.
3. Fire detection and alarm system annunciator.
4. Annunciator unit visually indicating the location of
the elevators and whether they are operational.
5. Status indicators and controls for air distribution
systems.
6. The fire-fighter’s control panel required by Section
909.16 for smoke control systems installed in the
building.
7. Controls for unlocking stairway doors simulta-
neously.
8. Sprinkler valve and waterflow detector display pan-
els.
9. Emergency and standby power status indicators.
10. A telephone for fire department use with controlled
access to the public telephone system.
11. Fire pump status indicators.
12. Schematic building plans indicating the typical
floor plan and detailing the building core, means of
egress, fire protection systems, fire-fighting equip-
ment and fire department access and the location of
fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barri-
ers and smoke partitions.
13. Work table.
14. Generator supervision devices, manual start and
transfer features.
15. Public address system, where specifically required
by other sections of this code.
16. Elevator fire recall switch in accordance with
ASME A17.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

213

09_ibc_2009pg213.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:03:03 AM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

17. Elevator emergency or standby power selector
switch(es), where emergency or standby power is
provided.

SECTION 912
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS

[F] 912.1 Installation. Fire department connections shall be
installed in accordance with the NFPA standard applicable to
the system design and shall comply with Sections 912.2
through 912.5.
[F] 912.2 Location. With respect to hydrants, driveways,
buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall
be so located that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply
the system will not obstruct access to the buildings for other fire
apparatus. The location of fire department connections shall be
approved by the fire chief.
[F] 912.2.1 Visible location. Fire department connections
shall be located on the street side of buildings, fully visible
and recognizable from the street or nearest point of fire
department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the
fire chief.
[F] 912.2.2 Existing buildings. On existing buildings,
wherever the fire department connection is not visible to
approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection
shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street
front or on the side of the building. Such sign shall have the
letters “FDC” at least 6 inches (152 mm) high and words in
letters at least 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate
the location. All such signs shall be subject to the approval
of the fire code official.
[F] 912.3 Access. Immediate access to fire department connec-
tions shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction
by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or moveable
ob jec t . Access to fire depar tmen t connec t ions sha l l be
approved by the fire chief.
Exception: Fences, where provided with an access gate
equipped with a sign complying with the legend require-
ments of Section 912.4 and a means of emergency opera-
tion. The gate and the means of emergency operation shall
be approved by the fire chief and maintained operational at
all times.
[F] 912.3.1 Locking fire department connection caps.
The fire code official is authorized to require locking caps
on fire department connections for water-based fire protec-
tion systems where the responding fire department carries
appropriate key wrenches for removal.
[F] 912.3.2 Clear space around connections. A working
space of not less than 36 inches (762 mm) in width, 36
inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1981 mm) in
height shall be provided and maintained in front of and to
the sides of wall-mounted fire department connections and
around the circumference of free-standing fire department
connections, except as otherwise required or approved by
the fire chief.
[F] 912.3.3 Physical protection. Where fire department
connections are subject to impact by a motor vehicle, vehi-

cle impact protection shall be provided in accordance with
Section 312 of the International Fire Code.
[F] 912.4 Signs. A metal sign with raised letters at least 1 inch
(25 mm) in size shall be mounted on all fire department con-
nections serving automatic sprinklers, standpipes or fire pump
connections. Such signs shall read: AUTOMATIC SPRIN-
KLERS or STANDPIPES or TEST CONNECTION or a com-
bination  thereof  as  applicable.  Where  the  fire  department
connection does not serve the entire building, a sign shall be
provided indicating the portions of the building served.
[P] 912.5 Backflow protection. The potable water supply to
automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be protected
against backflow as required by the International Plumbing
Code.

SECTION 913
FIRE PUMPS

[F] 913.1 General. Where provided, fire pumps shall be
installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 20.
[F] 913.2 Protection against interruption of service. The fire
pump, driver and controller shall be protected in accordance
with NFPA 20 against possible interruption of service through
damage caused by explosion, fire, flood, earthquake, rodents,
insects, windstorm, freezing, vandalism and other adverse con-
ditions.
913.2.1 Protection of fire pump rooms. Fire pumps shall
be located in rooms that are separated from all other areas of
the building by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accor-
dance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
Exceptions:
1. In other than high-rise buildings, separation by
1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
both, shall be permitted in buildings equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
2. Separation is not required for fire pumps physi-
cally separated in accordance with NFPA 20.
[F] 913.3 Temperature of pump room. Suitable means shall
be provided for maintaining the temperature of a pump room or
pump house, where required, above 40°F (5°C).
[F] 913.3.1 Engine manufacturer’s recommendation.
Temperature of the pump room, pump house or area where
engines are installed shall never be less than the minimum
recommended by the engine manufacturer. The engine
manufacturer’s recommendations for oil heaters shall be
followed.
[F] 913.4 Valve supervision. Where provided, the fire pump
suction, discharge and bypass valves, and isolation valves on
the backflow prevention device or assembly shall be super-
vised open by one of the following methods:
1. Central-station, proprietary or remote-station signaling
service.

214

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:31 PM

34

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

2. Local signaling service that will cause the sounding of an
audible signal at a constantly attended location.
3. Locking valves open.
4. Sealing of valves and approved weekly recorded inspec-
tion where valves are located within fenced enclosures
under the control of the owner.
[F] 913.4.1 Test outlet valve supervision. Fire pump test
outlet valves shall be supervised in the closed position.
[F] 913.5 Acceptance test. Acceptance testing shall be done in
accordance with the requirements of NFPA 20.

SECTION 914
EMERGENCY RESPONDER SAFETY FEATURES

[F] 914.1 Shaftway markings. Vertical shafts shall be identi-
fied as required by Sections 914.1.1 and 914.1.2.
[F] 914.1.1 Exterior access to shaftways. Outside open-
ings accessible to the fire department and that open directly
on a hoistway or shaftway communicating between two or
more floors in a building shall be plainly marked with the
word “SHAFTWAY” in red letters at least 6 inches (152
mm) high on a white background. Such warning signs shall
be placed so as to be readily discernible from the outside of
the building.
[F] 914.1.2 Interior access to shaftways. Door or window
openings to a hoistway or shaftway from the interior of the
building shall be plainly marked with the word
“SHAFTWAY” in red letters at least 6 inches (152 mm) high
on a white background. Such warning signs shall be placed
so as to be readily discernible.
Exception: Markings shall not be required on shaftway
openings that are readily discernible as openings onto a
shaftway by the construction or arrangement.
[F] 914.2 Equipment room identification. Fire protection
equipment shall be identified in an approved manner. Rooms
containing controls for air-conditioning systems, sprinkler ris-
ers and valves or other fire detection, suppression or control
elements shall be identified for the use of the fire department.
Approved signs required to identify fire protection equipment
and equipment location shall be constructed of durable materi-
als, permanently installed and readily visible.

SECTION 915
EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE

[F] 915.1 General. Emergency responder radio coverage shall
be provided in all new buildings in accordance with Section
510 of the International Fire Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

215

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:31 PM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

216

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

09_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:0)9_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:05:31 PM

36

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 10

MEANS OF EGRESS

SECTION 1001
ADMINISTRATION

1001.1 General. Buildings or portions thereof shall be pro-
vided with a means of egress system as required by this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design, con-
struction and arrangement of means of egress components
required to provide an approved means of egress from struc-
tures and portions thereof.
1001.2 Minimum requirements. It shall be unlawful to alter a
building or structure in a manner that will reduce the number of
exits or the capacity of the means of egress to less than required
by this code.
[F] 1001.3 Maintenance. Means of egress shall be maintained
in accordance with the International Fire Code.

SECTION 1002
DEFINITIONS

1002.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and
unobstructed way of egress travel from any accessible point in
a building or facility to a public way.
AISLE. An unenclosed exit access component that defines and
provides a path of egress travel.
AISLE ACCESSWAY. That portion of an exit access that
leads to an aisle.
ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. A device that has a
series of steps between 50 and 70 degrees (0.87 and 1.22 rad)
from horizontal, usually attached to a center support rail in an
alternating manner so that the user does not have both feet on
the same level at the same time.
AREA OF REFUGE. An area where persons unable to use
stairways can remain temporarily to await instructions or assis-
tance during emergency evacuation.
BLEACHERS. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated struc-
tural system and two or more rows high and is not a building
element (see “Grandstands”).
COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. That portion of
exit access which the occupants are required to traverse before
two separate and distinct paths of egress travel to two exits are
available. Paths that merge are common paths of travel. Com-
mon paths of egress travel shall be included within the permit-
ted travel distance.
CORRIDOR. An enclosed exit access component that defines
and provides a path of egress travel to an exit.

DOOR, BALANCED. A door equipped with double-pivoted
hardware so designed as to cause a semicounter balanced
swing action when opening.
EGRESS COURT. A court or yard which provides access to a
public way for one or more exits.
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An
operable window, door or other similar device that provides for
a means of escape and access for rescue in the event of an emer-
gency.
EXIT. That portion of a means of egress system which is sepa-
rated from other interior spaces of a building or structure by
fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives as
required to provide a protected path of egress travel between
the exit access and the exit discharge. Exits include exterior exit
doors at the level of exit discharge, vertical exit enclosures, exit
passageways, exterior exit stairways, exterior exit ramps and
horizontal exits.
EXIT ACCESS. That portion of a means of egress system that
leads from any occupied portion of a building or structure to an
exit.
EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY. A door or access point along the
path of egress travel from an occupied room, area or space
where the path of egress enters an intervening room, corridor,
unenclosed exit access stair or unenclosed exit access ramp.
EXIT DISCHARGE. That portion of a means of egress sys-
tem between the termination of an exit and a public way.
EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF. The story at the point at
which an exit terminates and an exit discharge begins.
EXIT ENCLOSURE. An exit component that is separated
from other interior spaces of a building or structure by
fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives, and
provides for a protected path of egress travel in a vertical or hor-
izontal direction to the exit discharge or the public way.
EXIT, HORIZONTAL. A path of egress travel from one
building to an area in another building on approximately the
same level, or a path of egress travel through or around a wall or
partition to an area on approximately the same level in the same
building, which affords safety from fire and smoke from the
area of incidence and areas communicating therewith.
EXIT PASSAGEWAY. An exit component that is separated
from other interior spaces of a building or structure by
fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives, and
provides for a protected path of egress travel in a horizontal
direction to the exit discharge or the public way.
FIRE EXIT HARDWARE. Panic hardware that is listed for
use on fire door assemblies.
FLIGHT. A continuous run of rectangular treads, winders or
combination thereof from one landing to another.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

217

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:36 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The floor area within the inside per-
imeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration,
exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corri-
dors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, col-
umns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion
thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be
the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or
floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with
no openings or interior courts.
FLOOR AREA, NET. The actual occupied area not including
unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, toilet
rooms, mechanical rooms and closets.
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING. Tiered seating
having an overall shape and size that is capable of being
reduced for purposes of moving or storing and is not a building
element.
GRANDSTAND. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated
structural system and two or more rows high and is not a build-
ing element (see “Bleachers”).
GUARD. A building component or a system of building com-
ponents located at or near the open sides of elevated walking
surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walk-
ing surface to a lower level.
HANDRAIL. A horizontal or sloping rail intended for grasp-
ing by the hand for guidance or support.
MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and unobstructed path
of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any occupied por-
tion of a building or structure to a public way. A means of
egress consists of three separate and distinct parts: the exit
access, the exit and the exit discharge.
MERCHANDISE PAD. A merchandise pad is an area for dis-
play of merchandise surrounded by aisles, permanent fixtures
or walls. Merchandise pads contain elements such as nonfixed
and moveable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions as
indicated in Section 105.2 from which customers browse or
shop.
NOSING. The leading edge of treads of stairs and of landings
at the top of stairway flights.
OCCUPANT LOAD. The number of persons for which the
means of egress of a building or portion thereof is designed.
PANIC HARDWARE. A door-latching assembly incorporat-
ing a device that releases the latch upon the application of a
force in the direction of egress travel.
PHOTOLUMINESCENT. Having the property of emitting
light that continues for a length of time after excitation by visi-
ble or invisible light has been removed.
PUBLIC WAY. A street, alley or other parcel of land open to
the outside air leading to a street, that has been deeded, dedi-
cated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for
public use and which has a clear width and height of not less
than 10 feet (3048 mm).
RAMP. A walking surface that has a running slope steeper than
one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope).

SCISSOR STAIR. Two interlocking stairways providing two
separate paths of egress located within one stairwell enclosure.
SELF-LUMINOUS. Illuminated by a self-contained power
source, other than batteries, and operated independently of
external power sources.
SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating
served by means of egress that is not subject to smoke accumu-
lation within or under a structure.
STAIR. A change in elevation, consisting of one or more ris-
ers.
STAIRWAY. One or more flights of stairs, either exterior or
interior, with the necessary landings and platforms connecting
them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one
level to another.
STAIRWAY, EXTERIOR. A stairway that is open on at least
one side, except for required structural columns, beams, hand-
rails and guards. The adjoining open areas shall be either
yards, courts or public ways. The other sides of the exterior
stairway need not be open.
STAIRWAY, INTERIOR. A stairway not meeting the defini-
tion of an exterior stairway.
STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. A stairway having a closed circular
form in its plan view with uniform section-shaped treads
attached to and radiating from a minimum-diameter supporting
column.
SUITE. A group of patient treatment rooms or patient sleeping
rooms within Group I-2 occupancies where staff are in atten-
dance within the suite, for supervision of all patients within the
suite and the suite is in compliance with the requirements of
Sections 1014.2.2 through 1014.2.7.
WINDER. A tread with nonparallel edges.

SECTION 1003
GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS

1003.1 Applicability. The general requirements specified in
Sections 1003 through 1013 shall apply to all three elements of
the means of egress system, in addition to those specific
requirements for the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge
detailed elsewhere in this chapter.
1003.2 Ceiling height. The means of egress shall have a ceiling
height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Sloped ceilings in accordance with Section 1208.2.
2. Ceilings of dwelling units and sleeping units within
residential occupancies in accordance with Section
1208.2.
3. Allowable projections in accordance with Section
1003.3.
4. Stair headroom in accordance with Section 1009.2.
5. Door height in accordance with Section 1008.1.1.

218

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:37 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

6. R am p h e a d r o om i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
1010.5.2.
7. The clear height of floor levels in vehicular and
pedestrian traffic areas in parking garages in accor-
dance with Section 406.2.2.
8. Areas above and below mezzanine floors in accor-
dance with Section 505.1.
1003.3 Protruding objects. Protruding objects shall comply
with the requirements of Sections 1003.3.1 through 1003.3.4.
1003.3.1 Headroom. Protruding objects are permitted to
extend below the minimum ceiling height required by Sec-
tion 1003.2 provided a minimum headroom of 80 inches
(2032 mm) shall be provided for any walking surface,
including walks, corridors, aisles and passageways. Not
more than 50 percent of the ceiling area of a means of egress
shall be reduced in height by protruding objects.
Exception: Door closers and stops shall not reduce
headroom to less than 78 inches (1981 mm).
A barrier shall be provided where the vertical clearance is
less than 80 inches (2032 mm) high. The leading edge of
such a barrier shall be located 27 inches (686 mm) maxi-
mum above the floor.
1003.3.2 Post-mounted objects. A free-standing object
mounted on a post or pylon shall not overhang that post or
pylon more than 4 inches (102 mm) where the lowest point
of the leading edge is more than 27 inches (686 mm) and
less than 80 inches (2032 mm) above the walking surface.
Where a sign or other obstruction is mounted between posts
or pylons and the clear distance between the posts or pylons
is greater than 12 inches (305 mm), the lowest edge of such
sign or obstruction shall be 27 inches (686 mm) maximum
or 80 inches (2032 mm) minimum above the finished floor
or ground.
Exception: These requirements shall not apply to slop-
ing portions of handrails between the top and bottom
riser of stairs and above the ramp run.
1003.3.3 Horizontal projections. Structural elements, fix-
tures or furnishings shall not project horizontally from
either side more than 4 inches (102 mm) over any walking
surface between the heights of 27 inches (686 mm) and 80
inches (2032 mm) above the walking surface.
Exception: Handrails are permitted to protrude 41/2
inches (114 mm) from the wall.
1003.3.4 Clear width. Protruding objects shall not reduce
the minimum clear width of accessible routes.
1003.4 Floor surface. Walking surfaces of the means of egress
shall have a slip-resistant surface and be securely attached.
1003.5 Elevation change. Where changes in elevation of less
than 12 inches (305 mm) exist in the means of egress, sloped
surfaces shall be used. Where the slope is greater than one unit
vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope), ramps com-
plying with Section 1010 shall be used. Where the difference in
elevation is 6 inches (152 mm) or less, the ramp shall be

MEANS OF EGRESS

equipped with either handrails or floor finish materials that
contrast with adjacent floor finish materials.
Exceptions:
1. A single step with a maximum riser height of 7 inches
(178 mm) is permitted for buildings with occupancies
in Groups F, H, R-2, R-3, S and U at exterior doors not
required to be accessible by Chapter 11.
2. A stair with a single riser or with two risers and a tread
is permitted at locations not required to be accessible
by Chapter 11, provided that the risers and treads
comply with Section 1009.4, the minimum depth of
the tread is 13 inches (330 mm) and at least one hand-
rail complying with Section 1012 is provided within
30 inches (762 mm) of the centerline of the normal
path of egress travel on the stair.
3. A step is permitted in aisles serving seating that has a
difference in elevation less than 12 inches (305 mm)
at locations not required to be accessible by Chapter
11, provided that the risers and treads comply with
Section 1028.11 and the aisle is provided with a hand-
rail complying with Section 1028.13.
Throughout a story in a Group I-2 occupancy, any change in
e l e v a t i o n i n p o r t i o n s o f t h e e x i t a c c e s s t h a t s e r v e
nonambulatory persons shall be by means of a ramp or sloped
walkway.
1003.6 Means of egress continuity. The path of egress travel
along a means of egress shall not be interrupted by any building
element other than a means of egress component as specified in
this chapter. Obstructions shall not be placed in the required
width of a means of egress except projections permitted by this
chapter. The required capacity of a means of egress system
shall not be diminished along the path of egress travel.
1003.7 Elevators, escalators and moving walks. Elevators,
escalators and moving walks shall not be used as a component of
a required means of egress from any other part of the building.
Exception: Elevators used as an accessible means of egress
in accordance with Section 1007.4.

SECTION 1004
OCCUPANT LOAD

1004.1 Design occupant load. In determining means of egress
requirements, the number of occupants for whom means of
egress facilities shall be provided shall be determined in accor-
dance with this section. Where occupants from accessory areas
egress through a primary space, the calculated occupant load
for the primary space shall include the total occupant load of
the primary space plus the number of occupants egressing
through it from the accessory area.
1004.1.1 Areas without fixed seating. The number of
occupants shall be computed at the rate of one occupant per
unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.1.1. For areas with-
out fixed seating, the occupant load shall not be less than
that number determined by dividing the floor area under

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

219

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:37 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

consideration by the occupant per unit of area factor
assigned to the occupancy as set forth in Table 1004.1.1.
Where an intended use is not listed in Table 1004.1.1, the
building official shall establish a use based on a listed use
that most nearly resembles the intended use.
Exception: Where approved by the building official, the
actual number of occupants for whom each occupied
space, floor or building is designed, although less than
those determined by calculation, shall be permitted to be
used in the determination of the design occupant load.
1004.2 Increased occupant load. The occupant load permitted
in any building, or portion thereof, is permitted to be increased
from that number established for the occupancies in Table
1004.1.1, provided that all other requirements of the code are
also met based on such modified number and the occupant load
does not exceed one occupant per 7 square feet (0.65 m2) of
occupiable floor space. Where required by the building official,
an approved aisle, seating or fixed equipment diagram substanti-
ating any increase in occupant load shall be submitted. Where
required by the building official, such diagram shall be posted.
1004.3 Posting of occupant load. Every room or space that is
an assembly occupancy shall have the occupant load of the
room or space posted in a conspicuous place, near the main exit
or exit access doorway from the room or space. Posted signs
shall be of an approved legible permanent design and shall be
maintained by the owner or authorized agent.
1004.4 Exiting from multiple levels. Where exits serve more
than one floor, only the occupant load of each floor considered
individually shall be used in computing the required capacity
of the exits at that floor, provided that the exit capacity shall not
decrease in the direction of egress travel.
1004.5 Egress convergence. Where means of egress from
floors above and below converge at an intermediate level, the
capacity of the means of egress from the point of convergence
shall not be less than the sum of the two floors.
1004.6 Mezzanine levels. The occupant load of a mezzanine
level with egress onto a room or area below shall be added to
that room or area’s occupant load, and the capacity of the exits
shall be designed for the total occupant load thus established.
1004.7 Fixed seating. For areas having fixed seats and aisles,
the occupant load shall be determined by the number of fixed
seats installed therein. The occupant load for areas in which
fixed seating is not installed, such as waiting spaces and wheel-
chair spaces, shall be determined in accordance with Section
1004.1.1 and added to the number of f ixed seats.
For areas having fixed seating without dividing arms, the
occupant load shall not be less than the number of seats based
on one person for each 18 inches (457 mm) of seating length.
The occupant load of seating booths shall be based on one
person for each 24 inches (610 mm) of booth seat length mea-
sured at the backrest of the seating booth.
1004.8 Outdoor areas. Yards, patios, courts and similar out-
door areas accessible to and usable by the building occupants
shall be provided with means of egress as required by this chap-
ter. The occupant load of such outdoor areas shall be assigned
by the building official in accordance with the anticipated use.

TABLE 1004.1.1
MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT

FUNCTION OF SPACE

FLOOR AREA IN SQ.
FT. PER OCCUPANT

Accessory storage areas, mechanical
equipment room
Agricultural building
Aircraft hangars
Airport terminal
Baggage claim
Baggage handling
Concourse
Waiting areas
Assembly
Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.)
Assembly with fixed seats
Assembly without fixed seats
Concentrated (chairs only—not fixed)
Standing space
Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)
Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each
lane including 15 feet of runway, and for
additional areas
Business areas
Courtrooms—other than fixed seating areas
Day care
Dormitories
Educational
Classroom area
Shops and other vocational room areas
Exercise rooms
H-5 Fabrication and manufacturing areas
Industrial areas
Institutional areas
Inpatient treatment areas
Outpatient areas
Sleeping areas
Kitchens, commercial
Library
Reading rooms
Stack area
Locker rooms
Mercantile
Areas on other floors
Basement and grade floor areas
Storage, stock, shipping areas
Parking garages
Residential
Skating rinks, swimming pools
Rink and pool
Decks
Stages and platforms
Warehouses

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

300 gross

300 gross
500 gross

20 gross
300 gross
100 gross
15 gross

11 gross
See Section 1004.7

7 net
5 net
15 net

7 net
100 gross
40 net
35 net
50 gross

20 net
50 net
50 gross
200 gross
100 gross

240 gross
100 gross
120 gross
200 gross

50 net
100 gross
50 gross

60 gross
30 gross
300 gross
200 gross
200 gross

50 gross
15 gross
15 net
500 gross

220

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:38 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Where outdoor areas are to be used by persons in addition to the
occupants of the building, and the path of egress travel from the
outdoor areas passes through the building, means of egress
requirements for the building shall be based on the sum of the
occupant loads of the building plus the outdoor areas.

Exceptions:

1. Outdoor areas used exclusively for service of the
building need only have one means of egress.
2. Both outdoor areas associated with Group R-3 and
individual dwelling units of Group R-2.
1004.9 Multiple occupancies. Where a building contains two
or more occupancies, the means of egress requirements shall
apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy of
that space. Where two or more occupancies utilize portions of
the same means of egress system, those egress components
shall meet the more stringent requirements of all occupancies
that are served.

SECTION 1005
EGRESS WIDTH
1005.1 Minimum required egress width. The means of
egress width shall not be less than required by this section. The
total width of means of egress in inches (mm) shall not be less
than the total occupant load served by the means of egress mul-
tiplied by 0.3 inches (7.62 mm) per occupant for stairways and
by 0.2 inches (5.08 mm) per occupant for other egress compo-
nents. The width shall not be less than specified elsewhere in
this code. Multiple means of egress shall be sized such that the
loss of any one means of egress shall not reduce the available
capacity to less than 50 percent of the required capacity. The
maximum capacity required from any story of a building shall
be maintained to the termination of the means of egress.

➡

Exception: Means of egress complying with Section 1028.

1005.2 Door encroachment. Doors, when fully opened, and
handrails shall not reduce the required means of egress width
by more than 7 inches (178 mm). Doors in any position shall
not reduce the required width by more than one-half. Other
nonstructural projections such as trim and similar decorative
features shall be permitted to project into the required width a
maximum of 11/2 inches (38 mm) on each side.
Exception: The restrictions on a door swing shall not apply
to doors within individual dwelling units and sleeping units
of Group R-2 and dwelling units of Group R-3.

1005.3 Door hardware encroachment. Surface-mounted
latch release hardware shall be exempt from inclusion in the
7-inch (178 mm) maximum projection requirement of Section
1005.2 when:

1. The hardware is mounted to the side of the door facing
the corridor width when the door is in the open position;
and
2. The hardware is mounted not less than 34 inches (865
mm) or more than 48 inches (1220 mm) above the fin-
ished floor.

MEANS OF EGRESS

SECTION 1006
MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
1006.1 Illumination required. The means of egress, including
the exit discharge, shall be illuminated at all times the building
space served by the means of egress is occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Occupancies in Group U.
2. Aisle accessways in Group A.
3. Dwelling units and sleeping units in Groups R-1, R-2
and R-3.
4. Sleeping units of Group I occupancies.
1006.2 Illumination level. The means of egress illumination
level shall not be less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking
surface.
Exception: For auditoriums, theaters, concert or opera halls
and similar assembly occupancies, the illumination at the
walking surface is permitted to be reduced during perfor-
mances to not less than 0.2 foot-candle (2.15 lux), provided
that the required illumination is automatically restored upon
activation of a premises’ fire alarm system where such sys-
tem is provided.
1006.3 Illumination emergency power. The power supply for
means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the
premises’ electrical supply.
In the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical
system  shall  automatically  illuminate  all  of  the  following
areas:
1. Aisles and unenclosed egress stairways in rooms and
spaces that require two or more means of egress.
2. Corridors, exit enclosures and exit passageways in
buildings required to have two or more exits.
3. Exterior egress components at other than their levels of
exit discharge until exit discharge is accomplished for
buildings required to have two or more exits.
4. Interior exit discharge elements, as permitted in Section
1027.1, in buildings required to have two or more exits.
5. Exterior landings as required by Section 1008.1.6 for exit
discharge doorways in buildings required to have two or
more exits.
The emergency power system shall provide power for a
duration of not less than 90 minutes and shall consist of storage
batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installa-
tion of the emergency power system shall be in accordance
with Chapter 27.
1006.4 Performance of system. Emergency lighting facilities
shall be arranged to provide initial illumination that is at least
an average of 1 foot-candle (11 lux) and a minimum at any
point of 0.1 foot-candle (1 lux) measured along the path of
egress at floor level. Illumination levels shall be permitted to
decline to 0.6 foot-candle (6 lux) average and a minimum at
any point of 0.06 foot-candle (0.6 lux) at the end of the emer-
gency lighting time duration. A maximum-to-minimum illu-
mination uniformity ratio of 40 to 1 shall not be exceeded.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

221

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:38 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

SECTION 1007
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS
1007.1 Accessible means of egress required. Accessible
means of egress shall comply with this section. Accessible
spaces shall be provided with not less than one accessible
means of egress. Where more than one means of egress are
required by Section 1015.1 or 1021.1 from any accessible
space, each accessible portion of the space shall be served by
not less than two accessible means of egress.

Exceptions:
1. Accessible means of egress are not required in alter-
ations to existing buildings.
2. One accessible means of egress is required from an
accessible mezzanine level in accordance with Sec-
tion 1007.3, 1007.4 or 1007.5.
3. In assembly areas with sloped or stepped aisles, one
accessible means of egress is permitted where the
common path of travel is accessible and meets the
requirements in Section 1028.8.
1007.2 Continuity and components. Each required accessi-

ble means of egress shall be continuous to a public way and
shall consist of one or more of the following components:
1. Accessible routes complying with Section 1104.
2. Interior exit stairways complying with Sections 1007.3
and 1022.
3. Exterior exit stairways complying with Sections 1007.3
and 1026.
4. Elevators complying with Section 1007.4.
5. Platform lifts complying with Section 1007.5.
6. Horizontal exits complying with Section 1025.
7. Ramps complying with Section 1010.
8. Areas of refuge complying with Section 1007.6.
Exceptions:
1. Where the exit discharge is not accessible, an exterior
area for assisted rescue must be provided in accor-
dance with Section 1007.7.
2. Where the exit stairway is open to the exterior, the
accessible means of egress shall include either an
area of refuge in accordance with Section 1007.6 or
an exterior area for assisted rescue in accordance with
Section 1007.7.
1007.2.1 Elevators required. In buildings where a required
accessible floor is four or more stories above or below a
level of exit discharge, at least one required accessible
means of egress shall be an elevator complying with Section
1007.4.
Exceptions:
1. In buildings equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the elevator
shall not be required on floors provided with a hor-
izontal exit and located at or above the levels of exit
discharge.

222

➡

2. In buildings equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the elevator
shall not be required on floors provided with a
ramp conforming to the provisions of Section
1010.

1007.3 Stairways. In order to be considered part of an accessi-
ble means of egress, an exit access stairway as permitted by
Section 1016.1 or exit stairway shall have a clear width of 48
inches (1219 mm) minimum between handrails and shall either
incorporate an area of refuge within an enlarged floor-level
landing or shall be accessed from either an area of refuge com-
plying with Section 1007.6 or a horizontal exit.

Exceptions:

1. The area of refuge is not required at open exit access
or exit stairways as permitted by Sections 1016.1 and
1022.1 in buildings that are equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
2. The clear width of 48 inches (1219 mm) between
handrails is not required at exit access stairway as
permitted by Section 1016.1or exit stairways in build-
ings equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
3. Areas of refuge are not required at exit stairways in
buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
4. The clear width of 48 inches (1219 mm) between
handrails is not required for exit stairways accessed
from a horizontal exit.
5. Areas of refuge are not required at exit stairways serv-
ing open parking garages .
6. Areas of refuge are not required for smoke protected
seating areas complying with Section 1028.6.2.
7. The areas of refuge are not required in Group R-2
occupancies.

1007.4 Elevators. In order to be considered part of an accessi-
ble means of egress, an elevator shall comply with the emer-
gency operation and signaling device requirements of Section
2.27 of ASME A17.1. Standby power shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 27 and Section 3003. The elevator
shall be accessed from either an area of refuge complying with
Section 1007.6 or a horizontal exit.

Exceptions:

1. Elevators are not required to be accessed from an area
of refuge or horizontal exit in open parking garages.
2. Elevators are not required to be accessed from an area
of refuge or horizontal exit in buildings and facilities
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:39 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3. Elevators not required to be located in a shaft in accor-
dance with Section 708.2 are not required to be
accessed from an area of refuge or horizontal exit.
4. Elevators are not required to be accessed from an area
of refuge or horizontal exit for smoke protected seat-
ing areas complying with Section 1028.6.2.
1007.5 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts shall not
serve as part of an accessible means of egress, except where
allowed as part of a required accessible route in Section
1109.7, Items 1 through 9. Standby power shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 27 for platform lifts permitted to
serve as part of a means of egress.
1007.5.1 Openness. Platform lifts on an accessible means
of egress shall not be installed in a fully enclosed hoistway.
1007.6 Areas of refuge. Every required area of refuge shall be
accessible from the space it serves by an accessible means of
egress. The maximum travel distance from any accessible
space to an area of refuge shall not exceed the travel distance
permitted for the occupancy in accordance with Section
1016.1. Every required area of refuge shall have direct access
to a stairway within an exit enclosure complying with Sections
1007.3 and 1022 or an elevator complying with Section
1007.4. Where an elevator lobby is used as an area of refuge,
the shaft and lobby shall comply with Section 1022.9 for
smokeproof enclosures except where the elevators are in an
area of refuge formed by a horizontal exit or smoke barrier.

Exceptions:
1. A stairway serving an area of refuge is not required to
be enclosed where permitted in Sections 1016.1 and
1022.1.
2. Smokeproof enclosure is not required for an elevator
lobby used as an area of refuge not required to be
enclosed.
1007.6.1 Size. Each area of refuge shall be sized to accom-
modate one wheelchair space of 30 inches by 48 inches
(762 mm by1219 mm) for each 200 occupants or portion
thereof, based on the occupant load of the area of refuge and
areas served by the area of refuge. Such wheelchair spaces
shall not reduce the required means of egress width. Access
to any of the required wheelchair spaces in an area of refuge
shall not be obstructed by more than one adjoining wheel-
chair space.
1007.6.2 Separation. Each area of refuge shall be separated
from the remainder of the story by a smoke barrier comply-
ing with Section 710 or a horizontal exit complying with
Section 1025. Each area of refuge shall be designed to mini-
mize the intrusion of smoke.
Exception: Areas of refuge located within an exit enclo-
sure.

➡

1007.6.3 Two-way communication. Areas of refuge shall
be provided with a two-way communication system com-
plying with Sections 1007.8.1 and 1007.8.2.
1007.7 Exterior area for assisted rescue. The exterior area for
assisted rescue must be open to the outside air and meet the

MEANS OF EGRESS

➡

requirements of Section 1007.6.1. Separation walls shall com-
ply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls.
Where walls or openings are between the area for assisted res-
cue and the interior of the building, the building exterior walls
within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally of a nonrated wall or
unprotected opening shall have a fire-resistance rating of not
less than 1 hour. Openings within such exterior walls shall be
protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating
of not less than 3/4 hour. This construction shall extend verti-
cally from the ground to a point 10 feet (3048 mm) above the
floor level of the area for assisted rescue or to the roof line,
whichever is lower.
1007.7.1 Openness. The exterior area for assisted rescue
shall be at least 50 percent open, and the open area above the
guards shall be so distributed as to minimize the accumula-
tion of smoke or toxic gases.
1007.7.2 Exterior exit stairway. Exterior exit stairways
that are part of the means of egress for the exterior area for
assisted rescue shall provide a clear width of 48 inches
(1219 mm) between handrails.
1007.8 Two-way communication. A two-way communica-
tion system shall be provided at the elevator landing on each
accessible floor that is one or more stories above or below the
story of exit discharge complying with Sections 1007.8.1 and
1007.8.2.
Exceptions:
1. Two-way communication systems are not required at
the elevator landing where the two-way communica-
tion system is provided within areas of refuge in
accordance with Section 1007.6.3.
2. Two-way communication systems are not required on
floors provided with exit ramps conforming to the
provisions of Section 1010.
1007.8.1 System requirements. Two-way communication
systems
shall provide communication between each
required location and the fire command center or a central
control point location approved by the fire department.
Where the central control point is not constantly attended, a
two-way communication system shall have a timed auto-
matic telephone dial-out capability to a monitoring location
or 911. The two-way communication system shall include
both audible and visible signals.
1007.8.2 Directions. Directions for the use of the two-way
communication system, instructions for summoning assis-
tance via the two-way communication system and written
identification of the location shall be posted adjacent to the
two-way communication system.
1007.9 Signage. Signage indicating special accessibility pro-
visions shall be provided as shown:
1. Each door providing access to an area of refuge from an
adjacent floor area shall be identified by a sign stating:
AREA OF REFUGE.
2. Each door providing access to an exterior area for
assisted rescue shall be identified by a sign stating:
EXTERIOR AREA FOR ASSISTED RESCUE.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

223

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:39 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

Signage shall comply with the ICC A117.1 requirements for
visual characters and include the International Symbol of
Accessibility. Where exit sign illumination is required by Sec-
tion 1011.2, the signs shall be illuminated. Additionally, tactile
signage complying with ICC A117.1 shall be located at each
door to an area of refuge and exterior area for assisted rescue in
accordance with Section 1011.3.
1007.10 Directional signage. Direction signage indicating the
location of the other means of egress and which are accessible
means of egress shall be provided at the following:
1. At exits serving a required accessible space but not pro-
viding an approved accessible means of egress .
2. At elevator landings.
3. Within areas of refuge.
1007.11 Instructions. In areas of refuge and exterior areas for
assisted rescue, instructions on the use of the area under emer-
gency conditions shall be posted. The instructions shall include
all of the following:
1. Persons able to use the exit stairway do so as soon as pos-
sible, unless they are assisting others.
2. Information on planned availability of assistance in the
use of stairs or supervised operation of elevators and how
to summon such assistance.
3. Directions for use of the two-way communications sys-
tem where provided.

SECTION 1008
DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES

1008.1 Doors. Means of egress doors shall meet the require-
ments of this section. Doors serving a means of egress system
shall meet the requirements of this section and Section 1020.2.
Doors provided for egress purposes in numbers greater than
required by this code shall meet the requirements of this sec-
tion.
Means of egress doors shall be readily distinguishable from
the adjacent construction and finishes such that the doors are
easily recognizable as doors. Mirrors or similar reflecting
materials shall not be used on means of egress doors. Means of
egress doors shall not be concealed by curtains, drapes, decora-
tions or similar materials.
1008.1.1 Size of doors. The minimum width of each door
opening shall be sufficient for the occupant load thereof and
shall provide a clear width of 32 inches (813 mm). Clear
openings of doorways with swinging doors shall be mea-
sured between the face of the door and the stop, with the
door open 90 degrees (1.57 rad). Where this section requires
a minimum clear width of 32 inches (813 mm) and a door
opening includes two door leaves without a mullion, one
leaf shall provide a clear opening width of 32 inches (813
mm). The maximum width of a swinging door leaf shall be

48 inches (1219 mm) nominal. Means of egress doors in a
Group I-2 occupancy used for the movement of beds shall
provide a clear width not less than 411/2 inches (1054 mm).
The height of door openings shall not be less than 80 inches
(2032 mm).
Exceptions:
1. The minimum and maximum width shall not apply
to door openings that are not part of the required
means of egress in Group R-2 and R-3 occupan-
cies.
2. Door openings to resident sleeping units in Group
I-3 occupancies shall have a clear width of not less
than 28 inches (711 mm).
3. Door openings to storage closets less than 10
square feet (0.93 m2) in area shall not be limited by
the minimum width.
4. Width of door leaves in revolving doors that com-
ply with Section 1008.1.4.1 shall not be limited.
5. Door openings within a dwelling unit or sleeping
unit shall not be less than 78 inches (1981 mm) in
height.
6. Exterior door openings in dwelling units and
sleeping units, other than the required exit door,
shall not be less than 76 inches (1930 mm) in
height.
7. In other than Group R-1 occupancies, the mini-
mum widths shall not apply to interior egress doors
within a dwelling unit or sleeping unit that is not
required to be an Accessible unit, Type A unit or
Type B unit.

1008.1.1.1 Projections into clear width. There shall not
be projections into the required clear width lower than 34
inches (864 mm) above the floor or ground. Projections
into the clear opening width between 34 inches (864
mm) and 80 inches (2032 mm) above the floor or ground
shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm).
Exception: Door closers and door stops shall be per-
mitted to be 78 inches (1980 mm) minimum above the
floor.
1008.1.2 Door swing. Egress doors shall be of the pivoted
or side-hinged swinging type.
Exceptions:
1. Private garages, office areas, factory and storage
areas with an occupant load of 10 or less.
2. Group I-3 occupancies used as a place of deten-
tion.
3. Critical or intensive care patient rooms within
suites of health care facilities.

224

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:39 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

4. Doors within or serving a single dwelling unit in
Groups R-2 and R-3.
5. In other than Group H occupancies, revolving
doors complying with Section 1008.1.4.1.
6. In other than Group H occupancies, horizontal
sliding doors complying with Section 1008.1.4.3
are permitted in a means of egress.
7. Power-operated doors in accordance with Section
1008.1.4.2.
8. Doors serving a bathroom within an individual
sleeping unit in Group R-1.
9. In other than Group H occupancies, manually
operated horizontal sliding doors are permitted in a
means of egress from spaces with an occupant
load of 10 or less.
Doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel where
serving an occupant load of 50 or more persons or a Group
H occupancy.
1008.1.3 Door opening force. The force for pushing or
pulling open interior swinging egress doors, other than fire
doors, shall not exceed 5 pounds (22 N). For other swinging
doors, as well as sliding and folding doors, the door latch
shall release when subjected to a 15-pound (67 N) force.
The door shall be set in motion when subjected to a
30-pound (133 N) force. The door shall swing to a full-open
position when subjected to a 15-pound (67 N) force.
1008.1.3.1 Location of applied forces. Forces shall be
applied to the latch side of the door.
1008.1.4 Special doors. Special doors and security grilles
shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1008.1.4.1
through 1008.1.4.5.
1008.1.4.1 Revolving doors. Revolving doors shall
comply with the following:
1. Each revolving door shall be capable of collapsing
into a bookfold position with parallel egress paths
providing an aggregate width of 36 inches (914
mm).
2. A revolving door shall not be located within 10
feet (3048 mm) of the foot of or top of stairs or
escalators. A dispersal area shall be provided
between the stairs or escalators and the revolving
doors.
3. The revolutions per minute (rpm) for a revolving
door shall not exceed those shown in Table
1008.1.4.1.
4. Each revolving door shall have a side-hinged
sw ing ing door wh ich comp lies w ith Sec tion
1008.1 in the same wall and within 10 feet (3048
mm) of the revolving door.
5. Revolving doors shall not be part of an accessible
route required by Section 1007 and Chapter 11.

MEANS OF EGRESS

TABLE 1008.1.4.1
REVOLVING DOOR SPEEDS

INSIDE DIAMETER
(feet-inches)

POWER-DRIVEN-TYPE
SPEED CONTROL
(rpm)

MANUAL-TYPE
SPEED CONTROL
(rpm)

6-6

7-0

7-6

8-0

8-6

9-0

9-6

10-0

11

10

9

9

8

8

7

7

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

12

11

11

10

9

9

8

8

1008.1.4.1.1 Egress component. A revolving door
used as a component of a means of egress shall com-
ply with Section 1008.1.4.1 and the following three
conditions:
1. Revolving doors shall not be given credit for
more than 50 percent of the required egress
capacity.
2. Each revolving door shall be credited with no
more than a 50-person capacity.
3. Each revolving door shall be capable of being
collapsed when a force of not more than 130
pounds (578 N) is applied within 3 inches (76
mm) of the outer edge of a wing.
1008.1.4.1.2 Other than egress component. A
revolving door used as other than a component of a
m e a n s o f eg re s s s h a l l c om p l y w i t h S e c t i o n
1008.1.4.1. The collapsing force of a revolving door
not used as a component of a means of egress shall not
be more than 180 pounds (801 N).
Exception: A collapsing force in excess of 180
pounds (801 N) is permitted if the collapsing force
is reduced to not more than 130 pounds (578 N)
when at least one of the following conditions is sat-
isfied:
1. There is a power failure or power is removed
to the device holding the door wings in posi-
tion.
2. There is an actuation of the automatic sprin-
kler system where such system is provided.
3. There is an actuation of a smoke detection
system which is installed in accordance with
Section 907 to provide coverage in areas
within the building which are within 75 feet
(22 860 mm) of the revolving doors.
4. There is an actuation of a manual control
switch, in an approved location and clearly

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

225

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:40 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

defined, which reduces the holding force to
below the 130-pound (578 N) force level.

1008.1.4.2 Power-operated doors. Where means of
egress doors are operated by power, such as doors with a
photoelectric-actuated mechanism to open the door upon
the approach of a person, or doors with power-assisted
manual operation, the design shall be such that in the
event of power failure, the door is capable of being
opened manually to permit means of egress travel or
closed where necessary to safeguard means of egress.
The forces required to open these doors manually shall
not exceed those specified in Section 1008.1.3, except
that the force to set the door in motion shall not exceed 50
pounds (220 N). The door shall be capable of swinging
from any position to the full width of the opening in
which such door is installed when a force is applied to the
d o o r o n t h e s i d e f r om w h i c h e g r e s s i s m a d e .
Full-power-operated doors shall comply with BHMA
A156.10. Power-assisted and low-energy doors shall
comply with BHMA A156.19.

Exceptions:

1. Occupancies in Group I-3.
2. Horizontal sliding doors complying with Sec-
tion 1008.1.4.3.
3. For a biparting door in the emergency breakout
mode, a door leaf located within a multiple-leaf
opening shall be exempt from the minimum
32-inch (813 mm) single-leaf requirement of
Section 1008.1.1, provided a minimum 32-inch
(813 mm) clear opening is provided when the
two biparting leaves meeting in the center are
broken out.
1008.1.4.3 Horizontal sliding doors. In other than
Group H occupancies, horizontal sliding doors permitted
to be a component of a means of egress in accordance
with Exception 6 to Section 1008.1.2 shall comply with
all of the following criteria:

1. The doors shall be power operated and shall be
capable of being operated manually in the event of
power failure.
2. The doors shall be openable by a simple method
from both sides without special knowledge or
effort.
3. The force required to operate the door shall not
exceed 30 pounds (133 N) to set the door in motion
and 15 pounds (67 N) to close the door or open it to
the minimum required width.
4. The door shall be openable with a force not to
exceed 15 pounds (67 N) when a force of 250
pounds (1100 N) is applied perpendicular to the
door adjacent to the operating device.
5. The door assembly shall comply with the applica-
ble fire protection rating and, where rated, shall be
self-closing or automatic closing by smoke detec-
tion in accordance with Section 715.4.8.3, shall be

226

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:40 PM

10

installed in accordance with NFPA 80 and shall
comply with Section 715.
6. The door assemb ly sha ll have an in tegra ted
standby power supply.
7. The door assembly power supply shall be electri-
cally supervised.
8. The door shall open to the minimum required
width within 10 seconds after activation of the
operating device.
1008 .1 .4 .4 Acce s s -con tro l led egre s s door s . The
entrance doors in a means of egress in buildings with an
occupancy in Group A, B, E, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 and
entrance doors to tenant spaces in occupancies in Groups
A, B, E, I-2, M, R-1 and R-2 are permitted to be equipped
with an approved entrance and egress access control sys-
tem which shall be installed in accordance with all of the
following criteria:
1. A sensor shall be provided on the egress side
arranged to detect an occupant approaching the
doors. The doors shall be arranged to unlock by a
signal from or loss of power to the sensor.
2. Loss of power to that part of the access control sys-
tem which locks the doors shall automatically
unlock the doors.
3. The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a man-
ual unlocking device located 40 inches to 48
inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the
floor and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured
doors. Ready access shall be provided to the man-
ual unlocking device and the device shall be
clearly identified by a sign that reads “PUSH TO
EXIT.” When operated, the manual unlocking
device shall result in direct interruption of power
to the lock—independent of the access control sys-
tem electronics—and the doors shall remain
unlocked for a minimum of 30 seconds.
4. Activation of the building fire alarm system, if
provided, shall automatically unlock the doors,
and the doors shall remain unlocked until the fire
alarm system has been reset.
5. Activation of the building automatic sprinkler or
fire detection system, if provided, shall automati-
cally unlock the doors. The doors shall remain
unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset.
6. Entrance doors in buildings with an occupancy in
Group A, B, E or M shall not be secured from the
egress side during periods that the building is open
to the general public.
1008.1.4.5 Security grilles. In Groups B, F, M and S,
horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles are permit-
ted at the main exit and shall be openable from the inside
without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort
during periods that the space is occupied. The grilles
shall remain secured in the full-open position during the
period of occupancy by the general public. Where two or
more means of egress are required, not more than

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

one-half of the exits or exit access doorways shall be
equipped with horizontal sliding or vertical security
grilles.
1008.1.5 Floor elevation. There shall be a floor or landing
on each side of a door. Such floor or landing shall be at the
same elevation on each side of the door. Landings shall be
level except for exterior landings, which are permitted to
have a slope not to exceed 0.25 unit vertical in 12 units hori-
zontal (2-percent slope).
Exceptions:
1. Doors serving individual dwelling units in Groups
R-2 and R-3 where the following apply:
1.1. A door is permitted to open at the top step
of an interior flight of stairs, provided the
door does not swing over the top step.
1.2. Screen doors and storm doors are permit-
ted to swing over stairs or landings.
2. Exterior doors as provided for in Section 1003.5,
Exception 1, and Section 1020.2, which are not on
an accessible route.
3. In Group R-3 occupancies not required to be
Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units, the
landing at an exterior doorway shall not be more
than 73/4 inches (197 mm) below the top of the
threshold, provided the door, other than an exterior
storm or screen door, does not swing over the land-
ing.
4. Variations in elevation due to differences in finish
materials, but not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).
5. Exterior decks, patios or balconies that are part of
Type B dwelling units, have impervious surfaces
and that are not more than 4 inches (102 mm)
below the finished floor level of the adjacent inte-
rior space of the dwelling unit.
1008.1.6 Landings at doors. Landings shall have a width
not less than the width of the stairway or the door, which-
ever is greater. Doors in the fully open position shall not
reduce a required dimension by more than 7 inches (178
mm). When a landing serves an occupant load of 50 or
more, doors in any position shall not reduce the landing to
less than one-half its required width. Landings shall have a
length measured in the direction of travel of not less than 44
inches (1118 mm).
Exception: Landing length in the direction of travel in
Groups R-3 and U and within individual units of Group
R-2 need not exceed 36 inches (914 mm).
1008.1.7 Thresholds. Thresholds at doorways shall not
exceed 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) in height for sliding doors serving
dwelling units or 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) for other doors. Raised
thresholds and floor level changes greater than 1/4 inch (6.4
mm) at doorways shall be beveled with a slope not greater
than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent
slope).
Exception: The threshold height shall be limited to 73/4
inches (197 mm) where the occupancy is Group R-2 or

MEANS OF EGRESS

R-3; the door is an exterior door that is not a component
of the required means of egress; the door, other than an
exterior storm or screen door, does not swing over the
landing or step; and the doorway is not on an accessible
route as required by Chapter 11 and is not part of an
Accessible unit, Type A unit or Type B unit.

1008.1.8 Door arrangement. Space between two doors in a
series shall be 48 inches (1219 mm) minimum plus the
width of a door swinging into the space. Doors in a series
shall swing either in the same direction or away from the
space between the doors.
Exceptions:
1. The minimum distance between horizontal sliding
power-operated doors in a series shall be 48 inches
(1219 mm).
2. Storm and screen doors serving individual dwell-
ing units in Groups R-2 and R-3 need not be spaced
48 inches (1219 mm) from the other door.
3. Doors within individual dwelling units in Groups
R-2 and R-3 other than within Type A dwelling
units.
1008.1.9 Door operations. Except as specifically permitted
by this section egress doors shall be readily openable from
the egress side without the use of a key or special knowledge
or effort.
1008.1.9.1 Hardware. Door handles, pulls, latches,
locks and other operating devices on doors required to be
accessible by Chapter 11 shall not require tight grasping,
tight pinching or twisting of the wrist to operate.
1008.1.9.2 Hardware height. Door handles, pulls,
latches, locks and other operating devices shall be
installed 34 inches (864 mm) minimum and 48 inches
(1219 mm) maximum above the finished floor. Locks
used only for security purposes and not used for normal
operation are permitted at any height.
Exception: Access doors or gates in barrier walls and
fences protecting pools, spas and hot tubs shall be per-
mitted to have operable parts of the release of latch on
self-latching devices at 54 inches (1370 mm) maxi-
mum above the finished floor or ground, provided the
self-latching devices are not also self-locking devices
operated by means of a key, electronic opener or inte-
gral combination lock.
1008.1.9.3 Locks and latches. Locks and latches shall
be permitted to prevent operation of doors where any of
the following exists:
1. Places of detention or restraint.
2. In buildings in occupancy Group A having an
occupant load of 300 or less, Groups B, F, M and
S, and in places of religious worship, the main
exterior door or doors are permitted to be equipped
with key-operated locking devices from the egress
side provided:
2.1. The locking device is readily distinguish-
able as locked;

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

227

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:40 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

2.2. A readily visible durable sign is posted on
the egress side on or adjacent to the door
s t a t i n g : TH I S DOOR TO R EMA IN
UNLOCKED WHEN BU ILD ING IS
OCCUPIED. The sign shall be in letters 1
inch (25 mm) high on a contrasting back-
ground; and
2.3. The use of the key-operated locking device
is revokable by the building official for due
cause.
3. Where egress doors are used in pairs, approved
automatic flush bolts shall be permitted to be used,
provided that the door leaf having the automatic
flush bolts has no doorknob or surface-mounted
hardware.
4. Doors from individual dwelling or sleeping units
of Group R occupancies having an occupant load
of 10 or less are permitted to be equipped with a
night latch, dead bolt or security chain, provided
such devices are openable from the inside without
the use of a key or tool.
5. Fire doors after the minimum elevated tempera-
ture has disabled the unlatching mechanism in
accordance with listed fire door test procedures.

1008.1.9.4 Bolt locks. Manually operated flush bolts or
surface bolts are not permitted.

Exceptions:

1. On doors not required for egress in individual
dwelling units or sleeping units.
2. Where a pair of doors serves a storage or equip-
ment room, manually operated edge- or sur-
face -moun ted bo l t s a re pe rm i t ted on the
inactive leaf.
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load
of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F or S
occupancy, manually operated edge- or sur-
face-mounted bolts are permitted on the inac-
tive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no
doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating
hardware.
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group B, F or S
occupancy, manually operated edge- or sur-
face-mounted bolts are permitted on the inac-
tive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not
needed to meet egress width requirements and
the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall con-
tain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operat-
ing hardware.
5. Where a pair of doors serves patient care rooms
in Group I-2 occupancies, self-latching edge-
or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the
inactive leaf provided that the inactive leaf is
not needed to meet egress width requirements

228

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:41 PM

12

and the inactive leaf contains no doorknobs,
panic bars or similar operating hardware.
1008.1.9.5 Unlatching. The unlatching of any door or
leaf shall not require more than one operation.
Exceptions:
1. Places of detention or restraint.
2. Where manually operated bolt locks are permit-
ted by Section 1008.1.9.4.
3. Doors with automatic flush bolts as permitted
by Section 1008.1.9.3, Exception 3.
4. Doors from individual dwelling units and
sleeping units of Group R occupancies as per-
mitted by Section 1008.1.9.3, Exception 4.
1008.1.9.5.1 Closet and bathroom doors in Group
R-4 occupancies. In Group R-4 occupancies, closet
doors that latch in the closed position shall be
openable from inside the closet, and bathroom doors
that latch in the closed position shall be capable of
being unlocked from the ingress side.
1008.1.9.6 Special locking arrangements in Group
I-2. Approved delayed egress locks shall be permitted in
a Group I-2 occupancy where the clinical needs of per-
sons receiving care require such locking. Delayed egress
locks shall be permitted in such occupancies where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
an approved automatic smoke or heat detection system
installed in accordance with Section 907, provided that
the doors unlock in accordance with Items 1 through 6
below. A building occupant shall not be required to pass
through more than one door equipped with a delayed
egress lock before entering an exit.
1. The doors unlock upon actuation of the automatic
sprinkler system or automatic fire detection sys-
tem.
2. The doors unlock upon loss of power controlling
the lock or lock mechanism.
3. The door locks shall have the capability of being
unlocked by a signal from the fire command cen-
ter, a nursing station or other approved location.
4. The procedures for the operation(s) of the unlock-
ing system shall be described and approved as part
of the emergency planning and preparedness
required by Chapter 4 of the International Fire
Code.
5. All clinical staff shall have the keys, codes or other
means necessary to operate the locking devices.
6. Emergency lighting shall be provided at the door.
Exception: Items 1 through 3 shall not apply to doors
to areas where persons, because of clinical needs,
require restraint or containment as part of the function
of a mental hospital.
1008.1.9.7 Delayed egress locks. Approved, listed,
delayed egress locks shall be permitted to be installed on

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

doors serving any occupancy except Group A, E and H
occupancies in buildings that are equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1 or an approved automatic smoke or
heat detection system installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 907, provided that the doors unlock in accordance
with Items 1 through 6 below. A building occupant shall
not be required to pass through more than one door
equipped with a delayed egress lock before entering an
exit.
1. The doors unlock upon actuation of the automatic
sprinkler system or automatic fire detection sys-
tem.
2. The doors unlock upon loss of power controlling
the lock or lock mechanism.
3. The door locks shall have the capability of being
unlocked by a signal from the fire command cen-
ter.
4. The initiation of an irreversible process which will
release the latch in not more than 15 seconds when
a force of not more than 15 pounds (67 N) is
applied for 1 second to the release device. Initia-
tion of the irreversible process shall activate an
audible signal in the vicinity of the door. Once the
door lock has been released by the application of
force to the releasing device, relocking shall be by
manual means only.
Exception: Where approved, a delay of not
more than 30 seconds is permitted.
5. A sign shall be provided on the door located above
and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the release
d e v i c e r e a d i n g : P U S H U N T I L A L A R M
SOUNDS. DOOR CAN BE OPENED IN 15 [30]
SECONDS.
6. Emergency lighting shall be provided at the door.
1008.1.9.8 Electromagnetically locked egress doors.
Doors in the means of egress that are not otherwise
required to have panic hardware in buildings with an
occupancy in Group A, B, E, M, R-1 or R-2 and doors to
tenant spaces in Group A, B, E, M, R-1 or R-2 shall be
permitted to be electromagnetically locked if equipped
with listed hardware that incorporates a built-in switch
and meet the requirements below:
1. The listed hardware that is affixed to the door leaf
has an obvious method of operation that is readily
operated under all lighting conditions.
2. The listed hardware is capable of being operated
with one hand.
3. Operation of the listed hardware releases to the
electromagnetic lock and unlocks the door imme-
diately.
4. Loss of power to the listed hardware automatically
unlocks the door.
1008.1.9.9 Locking arrangements in correctional
facilities. In occupancies in Groups A-2, A-3, A-4, B, E,

MEANS OF EGRESS

F, I-2, I-3, M and S within correctional and detention
facilities, doors in means of egress serving rooms or
spaces occupied by persons whose movements are con-
trolled for security reasons shall be permitted to be
locked when equipped with egress control devices which
shall unlock manually and by at least one of the follow-
ing means:
1. Activation of an au toma tic spr ink ler sys tem
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1;
2. Activation of an approved manual alarm box; or
3. A signal from a constantly attended location.

1008.1.9.10 Stairway doors. Interior stairway means of
egress doors shall be openable from both sides without
the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.
Exceptions:
1. Stairway discharge doors shall be openable
from the egress side and shall only be locked
from the opposite side.
2. This section shall not apply to doors arranged in
accordance with Section 403.5.3.
3. In stairways serving not more than four stories,
doors are permitted to be locked from the side
opposite the egress side, provided they are
openable from the egress side and capable of
b e i n g u n l o c k e d s im u l t a n e o u s l y w i t h o u t
unlatching upon a signal from the fire com-
mand center, if present, or a signal by emer-
gency personnel from a single location inside
the main entrance to the building.
1008.1.10 Panic and fire exit hardware. Doors serving a
Group H occupancy and doors serving rooms or spaces with
an occupant load of 50 or more in a Group A or E occupancy
shall not be provided with a latch or lock unless it is panic
hardware or fire exit hardware.
Exception: A main exit of a Group A occupancy in com-
pliance with Section 1008.1.9.3, Item 2.
Electrical rooms with equipment rated 1,200 amperes or
more and over 6 feet (1829 mm) wide that contain
overcurrent devices, switching devices or control devices
with exit or exit access doors shall be equipped with panic
hardware or fire exit hardware. The doors shall swing in the
direction of egress travel.
1008.1.10.1 Installation. Where panic or fire exit hard-
ware is installed, it shall comply with the following:
1. Panic hardware shall be listed in accordance with
UL 305;
2. Fire exit hardware shall be listed in accordance
with UL 10C and UL 305;
3. The actuating portion of the releasing device shall
extend at least one-half of the door leaf width; and
4. The maximum unlatching force shall not exceed
15 pounds (67 N).
1008.1.10.2 Balanced doors. If balanced doors are
used and panic hardware is required, the panic hardware

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

229

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:41 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

shall be the push-pad type and the pad shall not extend
more than one-half the width of the door measured from
the latch side.
1008.2 Gates. Gates serving the means of egress system shall
comply with the requirements of this section. Gates used as a
component in a means of egress shall conform to the applicable
requirements for doors.
Exception: Horizontal sliding or swinging gates exceeding
the 4-foot (1219 mm) maximum leaf width limitation are
permitted in fences and walls surrounding a stadium.
1008.2.1 Stadiums. Panic hardware is not required on gates
surrounding stadiums where such gates are under constant
immediate supervision while the public is present, and
where safe dispersal areas based on 3 square feet (0.28 m2)
per occupant are located between the fence and enclosed
space. Such required safe dispersal areas shall not be
located less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the enclosed
space. See Section 1027.6 for means of egress from safe dis-
persal areas.
1008.3 Turnstiles. Turnstiles or similar devices that restrict
travel to one direction shall not be placed so as to obstruct any
required means of egress.
Exception: Each turnstile or similar device shall be credited
with no more than a 50-person capacity where all of the fol-
lowing provisions are met:
1. Each device shall turn free in the direction of egress
travel when primary power is lost, and upon the man-
ual release by an employee in the area.
2. Such devices are not given credit for more than 50
percent of the required egress capacity.
3. Each device is not more than 39 inches (991 mm)
high.
4. Each device has at least 161/2 inches (419 mm) clear
width at and below a height of 39 inches (991 mm)
and at least 22 inches (559 mm) clear width at heights
above 39 inches (991 mm).
Where located as part of an accessible route, turnstiles shall
have at least 36 inches (914 mm) clear at and below a height of
34 inches (864 mm), at least 32 inches (813 mm) clear width
between 34 inches (864 mm) and 80 inches (2032 mm) and
shall consist of a mechanism other than a revolving device.
1008.3.1 High turnstile. Turnstiles more than 39 inches
(991 mm) high shall meet the requirements for revolving
doors.
1008.3.2 Additional door. Where serving an occupant load
greater than 300, each turnstile that is not portable shall have
a side-hinged swinging door which conforms to Section
1008.1 within 50 feet (15 240 mm).

SECTION 1009
STAIRWAYS

1009.1 Stairway width. The width of stairways shall be deter-
mined as specified in Section 1005.1, but such width shall not

be less than 44 inches (1118 mm). See Section 1007.3 for
accessible means of egress stairways.

Exceptions:
1. Stairways serving an occupant load of less than 50
shall have a width of not less than 36 inches (914
mm).
2. Spiral stairways as provided for in Section 1009.9.
3. Aisle stairs complying with Section 1028.
4. Where an incline platform lift or stairway chairlift is
installed on stairways serving occupancies in Group
R-3, or within dwelling units in occupancies in Group
R-2, a clear passage width not less than 20 inches (508
mm) shall be provided. If the seat and platform can be
folded when not in use, the distance shall be measured
from the folded position.
1009.2 Headroom. Stairways shall have a minimum head-
room clearance of 80 inches (2032 mm) measured vertically
from a line connecting the edge of the nosings. Such headroom
shall be continuous above the stairway to the point where the
line intersects the landing below, one tread depth beyond the
bottom riser. The minimum clearance shall be maintained the
full width of the stairway and landing.
Exceptions:
1. Spiral stairways complying with Section 1009.9 are
permitted a 78-inch (1981 mm) headroom clearance.
2. In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units in
Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupancies
that are accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy or acces-
sory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occu-
pancies; where the nosings of treads at the side of a
flight extend under the edge of a floor opening
through which the stair passes, the floor opening shall
be allowed to project horizontally into the required
headroom a maximum of 4 3/4 inches (121 mm).
1009.3 Walkline. The walkline across winder treads shall be
concentric to the direction of travel through the turn and
located 12 inches (305 mm) from the side where the winders
are narrower. The 12-inch (305 mm) dimension shall be mea-
sured from the widest point of the clear stair width at the walk-
ing surface of the winder. If winders are adjacent within the
flight, the point of the widest clear stair width of the adjacent
winders shall be used.
1009.4 Stair treads and risers. Stair treads and risers shall
comply with Sections 1009.4.1 through 1009.4.5.
1009.4.1 Dimension reference surfaces. For the purpose
of this section, all dimensions are exclusive of carpets, rugs
or runners.
1009.4.2 Riser height and tread depth. Stair riser heights
shall be 7 inches (178 mm) maximum and 4 inches (102
mm) minimum. The riser height shall be measured verti-
cally between the leading edges of adjacent treads. Rectan-
gular tread depths shall be 11 inches (279 mm) minimum
measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the
foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right angle to
the tread’s leading edge. Winder treads shall have a mini-

230

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:42 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

mum tread depth of 11 inches (279 mm) measured between
the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent
treads at the intersections with the walkline and a minimum
tread depth of 10 inches (254 mm) within the clear width of
the stair.

Exceptions:

1. Alternating tread devices in accordance with Sec-
tion 1009.10.
2. Ship ladders in accordance with Section 1009.11.
3. Sp ira l sta irways in accordance with Section
1009.9.
4. Aisle stairs in assembly seating areas where the
stair pitch or slope is set, for sightline reasons, by
the slope of the adjacent seating area in accordance
with Section 1028.11.2.
5. In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units
in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occu-
pancies that are accessory to a Group R-3 occu-
pancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in
Group R-2 occupancies; the maximum riser height
shall be 73/4 inches (197 mm); the minimum tread
depth shall be 10 inches (254 mm); the minimum
winder tread depth at the walkline shall be 10
inches (254 mm); and the minimum winder tread
depth shall be 6 inches (152 mm). A nosing not less
than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) but not more than 11/4
inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways
with solid risers where the tread depth is less than
11 inches (279 mm).
6. See Section 3404.1 for the replacement of existing
stairways.
7. In Group I-3 facilities, stairways providing access
to guard towers, observation stations and control
rooms, not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in
area, shall be permitted to have a maximum riser
height of 8 inches (203 mm) and a minimum tread
depth of 9 inches (229 mm).
1009.4.3 Winder treads. Winder treads are not permitted in
means of egress stairways except within a dwelling unit.
Exceptions:
1. Curved stairways in accordance with Section
1009.8.
2. Sp ira l sta irways in accordance with Section
1009.9.
1009.4.4 Dimensional uniformity. Stair treads and risers
shall be of uniform size and shape. The tolerance between
the largest and smallest riser height or between the largest
and smallest tread depth shall not exceed 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in
any flight of stairs. The greatest winder tread depth at the
walkline within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the
smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Nonuniform riser dimensions of aisle stairs com-
plying with Section 1028.11.2.

MEANS OF EGRESS

2. Consistently shaped winders, complying with
Sec tion 1009 .4 .2 , d iffer ing from rec tangu lar
treads in the same stairway flight.

Where the bottom or top riser adjoins a sloping public
way, walkway or driveway having an established grade and
serving as a landing, the bottom or top riser is permitted to
be reduced along the slope to less than 4 inches (102 mm) in
height, with the variation in height of the bottom or top riser
not to exceed one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-per-
cent slope) of stairway width. The nosings or leading edges
of treads at such nonuniform height risers shall have a dis-
tinctive marking stripe, different from any other nosing
marking provided on the stair flight. The distinctive mark-
ing stripe shall be visible in descent of the stair and shall
have a slip-resistant surface. Marking stripes shall have a
width of at least 1 inch (25 mm) but not more than 2 inches
(51 mm).

1009.4.5 Profile. The radius of curvature at the leading edge
of the tread shall be not greater than 9/16 inch (14.3 mm).
Beveling of nosings shall not exceed 9/16 inch (14.3 mm).
Risers shall be solid and vertical or sloped under the tread
above from the underside of the nosing above at an angle not
more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from the vertical. The lead-
ing edge (nosings) of treads shall project not more than 11/4
inches (32 mm) beyond the tread below and all projections
of the leading edges shall be of uniform size, including the
leading edge of the floor at the top of a flight.

Exceptions:

1. Solid risers are not required for stairways that are
not required to comply with Section 1007.3, pro-
vided that the opening between treads does not
permit the passage of a sphere with a diameter of 4
inches (102 mm).
2. Solid risers are not required for occupancies in
Group I-3 or in Group F, H and S occupancies
other than areas accessible to the public. There are
no restrictions on the size of the opening in the
riser.
3. Solid risers are not required for spiral stairways
constructed in accordance with Section 1009.9.
4. Solid risers are not required for alternating tread
devices constructed in accordance with Section
1009.10.

1009.5 Stairway landings. There shall be a floor or landing at
the top and bottom of each stairway. The width of landings
shall not be less than the width of stairways they serve. Every
landing shall have a minimum dimension measured in the
direction of travel equal to the width of the stairway. Such
dimension need not exceed 48 inches (1219 mm) where the
stairway has a straight run. Doors opening onto a landing shall
not reduce the landing to less than one-half the required width.
When fully open, the door shall not project more than 7 inches
(178 mm) into a landing. When wheelchair spaces are required
on the stairway landing in accordance with Section 1007.6.1,
the wheelchair space shall not be located in the required width

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

231

10_ibc_2009pg231.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 1:09:00 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

➡

of the landing and doors shall not swing over the wheelchair
spaces.
Exception: Aisle stairs complying with Section 1028.
1009.6 Stairway construction. All stairways shall be built of
materials consistent with the types permitted for the type of
construction of the building, except that wood handrails shall
be permitted for all types of construction.
1009.6.1 Stairway walking surface. The walking surface
of treads and landings of a stairway shall not be sloped
steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-per-
cent slope) in any direction. Stairway treads and landings
shall have a solid surface. Finish floor surfaces shall be
securely attached.
Exceptions:
1. Openings in stair walking surfaces shall be a size
that does not permit the passage of 1/2-inch-diame-
ter (12.7 mm) sphere. Elongated opening shall be
placed so that the long dimension is perpendicular
to the direction of travel.
2. In Group F, H and S occupancies, other than areas
of parking structures accessible to the public,
openings in treads and landings shall not be pro-
hibited provided a sphere with a diameter of 11/8
inches (29 mm) cannot pass through the opening.
1009.6.2 Outdoor conditions. Outdoor stairways and out-
door approaches to stairways shall be designed so that water
will not accumulate on walking surfaces.
1009.6.3 Enclosures under stairways. The walls and soffits
within enclosed usable spaces under enclosed and unen-
closed stairways shall be protected by 1-hour fire-resis-
tance-rated construction or the fire-resistance rating of the
stairway enclosure, whichever is greater. Access to the
enclosed space shall not be directly from within the stair
enclosure.
Exception: Spaces under stairways serving and con-
tained within a single residential dwelling unit in Group
R-2 or R-3 shall be permitted to be protected on the
enclosed side with 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.
There shall be no enclosed usable space under exterior
exit stairways unless the space is completely enclosed in
1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. The open space
under exterior stairways shall not be used for any purpose.
1009.7 Vertical rise. A flight of stairs shall not have a vertical
rise greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) between floor levels or
landings.
Exceptions:
1. Aisle stairs complying with Section 1028.
2. Alternating tread devices used as a means of egress
shall not have a rise greater than 20 feet (6096 mm)
between floor levels or landings.
1009.8 Curved stairways. Curved stairways with winder
treads shall have treads and risers in accordance with Section

1009.4 and the smallest radius shall not be less than twice the
required width of the stairway.
Exception: The radius restriction shall not apply to curved
stairways for occupancies in Group R-3 and within individ-
ual dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2.
1009.9 Spiral stairways. Spiral stairways are permitted to be
used as a component in the means of egress only within dwell-
ing units or from a space not more than 250 square feet (23 m2)
in area and serving not more than five occupants, or from gal-
leries, catwalks and gridirons in accordance with Section
1015.6.
A spiral stairway shall have a 71/2-inch (191 mm) minimum
clear tread depth at a point 12 inches (305 mm) from the narrow
edge. The risers shall be sufficient to provide a headroom of 78
inches (1981 mm) minimum, but riser height shall not be more
than 91/2 inches (241 mm). The minimum stairway clear width
at and below the handrail shall be 26 inches (660 mm).
1009.10 Alternating tread devices. Alternating tread devices
are limited to an element of a means of egress in buildings of
Groups F, H and S from a mezzanine not more than 250 square
feet (23 m2) in area and which serves not more than five occu-
pants; in buildings of Group I-3 from a guard tower, observa-
tion station or control room not more than 250 square feet (23
m2) in area and for access to unoccupied roofs.
1009.10.1 Handrails of alternating tread devices. Hand-
rails shall be provided on both sides of alternating tread
devices and shall comply with Section 1012.
1009.10.2 Treads of alternating tread devices. Alternat-
ing tread devices shall have a minimum projected tread of 5
inches (127 mm), a minimum tread depth of 81/2 inches (216
mm), a minimum tread width of 7 inches (178 mm) and a
maximum riser height of 91/2 inches (241 mm). The pro-
jected tread depth shall be measured horizontally between
the vertical planes of the foremost projections of adjacent
treads. The riser height shall be measured vertically
between the leading edges of adjacent treads. The combina-
tion of riser height and projected tread depth provided shall
result in an alternating tread device angle that complies with
Section 1002. The initial tread of the device shall begin at
the same elevation as the platform, landing or floor surface.
Exception: Alternating tread devices used as an element
of a means of egress in buildings from a mezzanine area
not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area which
serves not more than five occupants shall have a mini-
mum projected tread of 81/2 inches (216 mm) with a mini-
mum tread depth of 101/2 inches (267 mm). The rise to
the next alternating tread surface should not be more than
8 inches (203 mm).
1009.11 Ship ladders. Ship ladders are permitted to be used in
Group I-3 as a component of a means of egress to and from con-
trol rooms or elevated facility observation stations not more
than 250 square feet (23 m2) with not more than three occu-
pants and for access to unoccupied roofs.
Ship ladders shall have a minimum tread depth of 5 inches
(127 mm). The tread shall be projected such that the total of the

232

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:43 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

tread depth plus the nosing projection is no less than 81/2 inches
(216 mm). The maximum riser height shall be 91/2 inches (241
mm).

Handrails shall be provided on both sides of ship ladders.
The minimum clear width at and below the handrails shall be
20 inches (508 mm).

1009.12 Handrails. Stairways shall have handrails on each
side and shall comply with Section 1012. Where glass is used
to provide the handrail, the handrail shall also comply with
Section 2407.

Exceptions:

1. Handrails for aisle stairs are not required where permit-
ted by Section 1028.13.
2. Stairways within dwelling units, spiral stairways and
aisle stairs serving seating only on one side are permitted
to have a handrail on one side only.
3. Decks, patios and walkways that have a single change in
elevation where the landing depth on each side of the
change of elevation is greater than what is required for a
landing do not require handrails.
4. In Group R-3 occupancies, a change in elevation consist-
ing of a single riser at an entrance or egress door does not
require handrails.
5. Changes in room elevations of three or fewer risers
within dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2
and R-3 do not require handrails.

1009.13 Stairway to roof. In buildings four or more stories
above grade plane, one stairway shall extend to the roof sur-
face, unless the roof has a slope steeper than four units vertical
in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). In buildings without
an occupied roof, access to the roof from the top story shall be
permitted to be by an alternating tread device.

1009.13.1 Roof access. Where a stairway is provided to a
roof, access to the roof shall be provided through a pent-
house complying with Section 1509.2.

Exception: In buildings without an occupied roof,
access to the roof shall be permitted to be a roof hatch or
trap door not less than 16 square feet (1.5 m2) in area and
having a minimum dimension of 2 feet (610 mm).

1009.13.2 Protection at roof hatch openings. Where the
roof hatch opening providing the required access is located
within 10 feet (3049 mm) of the roof edge, such roof access
or roof edge shall be protected by guards installed in accor-
dance with the provisions of Section 1013.

1009.14 Stairway to elevator equipment. Roofs and pent-
houses containing elevator equipment that must be accessed
for maintenance are required to be accessed by a stairway.

MEANS OF EGRESS

SECTION 1010
RAMPS

1010.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to
ramps used as a component of a means of egress.
Exceptions:
1. Other than ramps that are part of the accessible routes
providing access in accordance with Sections 1108.2
through 1108.2.4 and 1108.2.6, ramped aisles within
assembly rooms or spaces shall conform with the pro-
visions in Section 1028.11.
2. Curb ramps shall comply with ICC A117.1.
3. Vehicle ramps in parking garages for pedestrian exit
access shall not be required to comply with Sections
1010.3 through 1010.9 when they are not an accessi-
ble route serving accessible parking spaces, other
required accessible elements or part of an accessible
means of egress.
1010.2 Slope. Ramps used as part of a means of egress shall
have a running slope not steeper than one unit vertical in 12
units horizontal (8-percent slope). The slope of other pedes-
trian ramps shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in eight
units horizontal (12.5-percent slope).
Exception: Aisle ramp slope in occupancies of Group A or
assembly occupancies accessory to Group E occupancies
shall comply with Section 1028.11.
1010.3 Cross slope. The slope measured perpendicular to the
direction of travel of a ramp shall not be steeper than one unit
vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).
1010.4 Vertical rise. The rise for any ramp run shall be 30
inches (762 mm) maximum.
1010.5 Minimum dimensions. The minimum dimensions of
means of egress ramps shall comply with Sections 1010.5.1
through 1010.5.3.
1010.5.1 Width. The minimum width of a means of egress
ramp shall not be less than that required for corridors by
Section 1018.2. The clear width of a ramp between hand-
rails, if provided, or other permissible projections shall be
36 inches (914 mm) minimum.
1010.5.2 Headroom. The minimum headroom in all parts
of the means of egress ramp shall not be less than 80 inches
(2032 mm).
1010.5.3 Restrictions. Means of egress ramps shall not
reduce in width in the direction of egress travel. Projections
into the required ramp and landing width are prohibited.
Doors opening onto a landing shall not reduce the clear
width to less than 42 inches (1067 mm).
1010.6 Landings. Ramps shall have landings at the bottom and
top of each ramp, points of turning, entrance, exits and at doors.
Landings shall comply w ith Sections 1010 .6 .1 through
1010.6.5.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

233

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:43 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

1010.6.1 Slope. Landings shall have a slope not steeper than
one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in
any direction. Changes in level are not permitted.
1010.6.2 Width. The landing shall be at least as wide as the
widest ramp run adjoining the landing.
1010.6.3 Length. The landing length shall be 60 inches
(1525 mm) minimum.
Exceptions:
1. In Group R-2 and R-3 individual dwelling and
sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible
units, Type A units or Type B units in accordance
with Section 1107, landings are permitted to be 36
inches (914 mm) minimum.
2. Where the ramp is not a part of an accessible route,
the length of the landing shall not be required to be
more than 48 inches (1220 mm) in the direction of
travel.
1010.6.4 Change in direction. Where changes in direction
of travel occur at landings provided between ramp runs, the
landing shall be 60 inches by 60 inches (1524 mm by 1524
mm) minimum.
Exception: In Group R-2 and R-3 individual dwelling or
sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible units,
Type A units or Type B units in accordance with Section
1107, landings are permitted to be 36 inches by 36 inches
(914 mm by 914 mm) minimum.
1010.6.5 Doorways. Where doorways are located adjacent
to a ramp landing, maneuvering clearances required by ICC
A117.1 are permitted to overlap the required landing area.
1010.7 Ramp construction. All ramps shall be built of materi-
als consistent with the types permitted for the type of construc-
tion of the building, except that wood handrails shall be
permitted for all types of construction. Ramps used as an exit
shall conform to the applicable requirements of Sections
1022.1 through 1022.6 for exit enclosures.
1010.7.1 Ramp surface. The surface of ramps shall be of
slip-resistant materials that are securely attached.
1010.7.2 Outdoor conditions. Outdoor ramps and outdoor
approaches to ramps shall be designed so that water will not
accumulate on walking surfaces.
1010.8 Handrails. Ramps with a rise greater than 6 inches
(152 mm) shall have handrails on both sides. Handrails shall
comply with Section 1012.
Exception: Handrails for ramped aisles are not required
where permitted by Section 1028.13.
1010.9 Edge protection. Edge protection complying with Sec-
tion 1010.9.1 or 1010.9.2 shall be provided on each side of
ramp runs and at each side of ramp landings.
Exceptions:
1. Edge protection is not required on ramps that are not
required to have handrails, provided they have flared
sides that comply with the ICC A117.1 curb ramp
provisions.

2. Edge protection is not required on the sides of ramp
landings serving an adjoining ramp run or stairway.
3. Edge protection is not required on the sides of ramp
landings having a vertical drop off of not more than 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) within 10 inches (254 mm) horizon-
tally of the required landing area.
4. In assembly spaces with fixed seating, edge protec-
tion is not required on the sides of ramps where the
ramps provide access to the adjacent seating and aisle
accessways.

1010.9.1 Curb, rail, wall or barrier. A curb, rail, wall or
barrier shall be provided to serve as edge protection. A curb
must be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in height. Barriers
must be constructed so that the barrier prevents the passage
of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere, where any portion of
the sphere is within 4 inches (102 mm) of the floor or ground
surface.
1010.9.2 Extended floor or ground surface. The floor or
ground surface of the ramp run or landing shall extend 12
inches (305 mm) minimum beyond the inside face of a
handrail complying with Section 1012.
1010.10 Guards. Guards shall be provided where required by
Section 1013 and shall be constructed in accordance with Sec-
tion 1013.

SECTION 1011
EXIT SIGNS

1011.1 Where required. Exits and exit access doors shall be
marked by an approved exit sign readily visible from any direc-
tion of egress travel. The path of egress travel to exits and
within exits shall be marked by readily visible exit signs to
clearly indicate the direction of egress travel in cases where the
exit or the path of egress travel is not immediately visible to the
occupants. Intervening means of egress doors within exits shall
be marked by exit signs. Exit sign placement shall be such that
no point in an exit access corridor or exit passageway is more
than 100 feet (30 480 mm) or the listed viewing distance for the
sign, whichever is less, from the nearest visible exit sign.
Exceptions:
1. Exit signs are not required in rooms or areas that
require only one exit or exit access.
2. Main exterior exit doors or gates that are obviously
and clearly identifiable as exits need not have exit
signs where approved by the building official.
3. Exit signs are not required in occupancies in Group U
and individual sleeping units or dwelling units in
Group R-1, R-2 or R-3.
4. Exit signs are not required in dayrooms, sleeping
rooms or dormitories in occupancies in Group I-3.
5. In occupancies in Groups A-4 and A-5, exit signs are
not required on the seating side of vomitories or open-
ings into seating areas where exit signs are provided in
the concourse that are readily apparent from the
vomitories. Egress lighting is provided to identify

234

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:44 PM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

each vomitory or opening within the seating area in an
emergency.
1011.2 Illumination. Exit signs shall be internally or exter-
nally illuminated.
Exception: Tactile signs required by Section 1011.3 need
not be provided with illumination.
1011.3 Tactile exit signs. A tactile sign stating EXIT and com-
plying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided adjacent to each
door to an area of refuge, an exterior area for assisted rescue, an
exit stairway, an exit ramp, an exit passageway and the exit dis-
charge.

1011.4 Internally illuminated exit signs. Electrically pow-

ered, self-luminous and photoluminescent exit signs shall be
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 924 and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
and Chapter 27. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times.
1011.5 Externally illuminated exit signs. Externally illumi-
nated exit signs shall comply with Sections 1011.5.1 through
1011.5.3.
1011.5.1 Graphics. Every exit sign and directional exit sign
shall have plainly legible letters not less than 6 inches (152
mm) high with the principal strokes of the letters not less
than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) wide. The word “EXIT” shall have
letters having a width not less than 2 inches (51 mm) wide,
except the letter “I,” and the minimum spacing between let-
ters shall not be less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Signs larger than
the minimum established in this section shall have letter
widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height.
The word “EXIT” shall be in high contrast with the back-
ground and shall be clearly discernible when the means of
exit sign illumination is or is not energized. If a chevron
directional indicator is provided as part of the exit sign, the
construction shall be such that the direction of the chevron
directional indicator cannot be readily changed.
1011.5.2 Exit sign illumination. The face of an exit sign
illuminated from an external source shall have an intensity
of not less than 5 foot-candles (54 lux).
1011.5.3 Power source. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all
times. To ensure continued illumination for a duration of not
less than 90 minutes in case of primary power loss, the sign
illumination means shall be connected to an emergency
power system provided from storage batteries, unit equip-
ment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emer-
gency power system shall be in accordance with Chapter 27.
Exception: Approved exit sign illumination means that
provide continuous illumination independent of external
power sources for a duration of not less than 90 minutes,
in case of primary power loss, are not required to be con-
nected to an emergency electrical system.

SECTION 1012
HANDRAILS

1012.1 Where required. Handrails for stairways and ramps
shall be adequate in strength and attachment in accordance
with Section 1607.7. Handrails required for stairways by Sec-

MEANS OF EGRESS

tion 1009.12 shall comply with Sections 1012.2 through
1012.9. Handrails required for ramps by Section 1010.8 shall
comply with Sections 1012.2 through 1012.8.
1012.2 Height. Handrail height, measured above stair tread
nosings, or finish surface of ramp slope, shall be uniform, not
less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965
mm). Handrail height of alternating tread devices and ship
ladders, measured above tread nosings, shall be uniform, not
less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864
mm).
1012.3 Handrail graspability. All required handrails shall
comply with Section 1012.3.1 or shall provide equivalent
graspability.
Exception: In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling
units in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupan-
cies that are accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy or acces-
sory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies;
handrails shall be Type I in accordance with Section
1012.3.1, Type II in accordance with Section 1012.3.2 or
shall provide equivalent graspability.
1012.3.1 Type I. Handrails with a circular cross section
shall have an outside diameter of at least 11/4 inches (32 mm)
and not greater than 2 inches (51 mm). If the handrail is not
circular, it shall have a perimeter dimension of at least 4
inches (102 mm) and not greater than 61/4 inches (160 mm)
with a maximum cross-section dimension of 21/4 inches (57
mm). Edges shall have a minimum radius of 0.01 inch (0.25
mm).
1012.3.2 Type II. Handrails with a perimeter greater than
61/4 inches (160 mm) shall provide a graspable finger recess
area on both sides of the profile. The finger recess shall
begin within a distance of 3/4 inch (19 mm) measured verti-
cally from the tallest portion of the profile and achieve a
depth of at least 5/16 inch (8 mm) within 7/8 inch (22 mm)
below the widest portion of the profile. This required depth
shall continue for at least 3/8 inch (10 mm) to a level that is
not less than 13/4 inches (45 mm) below the tallest portion of
the profile. The minimum width of the handrail above the
recess shall be 11/4 inches (32 mm) to a maximum of 23/4
inches (70 mm). Edges shall have a minimum radius of 0.01
inch (0.25 mm).
1012.4 Continuity. Handrail-gripping surfaces shall be con-
tinuous, without interruption by newel posts or other obstruc-
tions.
Exceptions:
1. Handrails within dwelling units are permitted to be
interrupted by a newel post at a turn or landing.
2. Within a dwelling unit, the use of a volute, turnout,
starting easing or starting newel is allowed over the
lowest tread.
3. Handrail brackets or balusters attached to the bottom
surface of the handrail that do not project horizon-
tally beyond the sides of the handrail within 11/2
inches (38 mm) of the bottom of the handrail shall not
be considered obstructions. For each 1/2 inch (12.7
mm) of additional handrail perimeter dimension

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

235

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:44 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

above 4 inches (102 mm), the vertical clearance
dimension of 11/2 inches (38 mm) shall be permitted to
be reduced by 1/8 inch (3 mm).
4. Where handrails are provided along walking surfaces
with slopes not steeper than 1:20, the bottoms of the
handrail gripping surfaces shall be permitted to be
obstructed along their entire length where they are
integral to crash rails or bumper guards.
1012.5 Fittings. Handrails shall not rotate within their fittings.
1012.6 Handrail extensions. Handrails shall return to a wall,
guard or the walking surface or shall be continuous to the hand-
rail of an adjacent stair flight or ramp run. Where handrails are
not continuous between flights, the handrails shall extend hori-
zontally at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the top riser and
continue to slope for the depth of one tread beyond the bottom
riser. At ramps where handrails are not continuous between
runs, the handrails shall extend horizontally above the landing
12 inches (305 mm) minimum beyond the top and bottom of
ramp runs. The extensions of handrails shall be in the same
direction of the stair flights at stairways and the ramp runs at
ramps.

Exceptions:
1. Handrails within a dwelling unit that is not required
to be accessible need extend only from the top riser to
the bottom riser.
2. Aisle handrails in Group A and E occupancies in
accordance with Section 1028.13.
3. Handrails for alternating tread devices and ship lad-
ders are permitted to terminate at a location vertically
above the top and bottom risers. Handrails for alter-
nating tread devices and ship ladders are not required
to be continuous between flights or to extend beyond
the top or bottom risers.
1012.7 Clearance. Clear space between a handrail and a wall
or other surface shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm). A
handrail and a wall or other surface adjacent to the handrail
shall be free of any sharp or abrasive elements.
1012.8 Projections. On ramps, the clear width between hand-
rails shall be 36 inches (914 mm) minimum. Projections into
the required width of stairways and ramps at each handrail
shall not exceed 41/2 inches (114 mm) at or below the handrail
height. Projections into the required width shall not be limited
above the minimum headroom height required in Section
1009.2.
1012.9 Intermediate handrails. Stairways shall have inter-
mediate handrails located in such a manner that all portions of
the stairway width required for egress capacity are within 30
inches (762 mm) of a handrail. On monumental stairs, hand-
rails shall be located along the most direct path of egress travel.

SECTION 1013
GUARDS

1013.1 Where required. Guards shall be located along
open-sided walking surfaces, including mezzanines, equip-

ment platforms, stairs, ramps and landings that are located
more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically to the floor
or grade below at any point within 36 inches (914 mm) hori-
zontally to the edge of the open side. Guards shall be adequate
in strength and attachment in accordance with Section 1607.7.

Exception: Guards are not required for the following loca-
tions:
1. On the loading side of loading docks or piers.
2. On the audience side of stages and raised platforms,
including steps leading up to the stage and raised plat-
forms.
3. On raised stage and platform floor areas, such as run-
ways, ramps and side stages used for entertainment or
presentations.
4. At vertical openings in the performance area of stages
and platforms.
5. At elevated walking surfaces appurtenant to stages
and platforms for access to and utilization of special
lighting or equipment.
6. Along vehicle service pits not accessible to the public.
7. In assembly seating where guards in accordance with
Section 1028.14 are permitted and provided.
1013.1.1 Glazing. Where glass is used to provide a guard or
as a portion of the guard system, the guard shall also comply
with Section 2407. Where the glazing provided does not
meet the strength and attachment requirements of Section
1607.7, complying guards shall also be located along
glazed sides of open-sided walking surfaces.

1013.2 Height. Required guards shall be not less than 42
inches (1067 mm) high, measured vertically above the adjacent
walking surfaces, adjacent fixed seating or the line connecting
the leading edges of the treads.

Exceptions:
1. For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual
dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2, guards
on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not less
than 34 inches (864 mm) measured vertically from a
line connecting the leading edges of the treads.
2. For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual
dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2, where
the top of the guard also serves as a handrail on the
open sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall not be
less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38
inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line con-
necting the leading edges of the treads.
3. The height in assembly seating areas shall be in accor-
dance with Section 1028.14.
4. Along alternating tread devices and ship ladders,
guards whose top rail also serves as a handrail, shall
have height not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not
more than 34 inches (864 mm), measured vertically
from the leading edge of the device tread nosing.

236

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:44 PM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1013.3 Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have
openings which allow passage of a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in
diameter from the walking surface to the required guard height.
Exceptions:
1. From a height of 36 inches (914 mm) to 42 inches
(1067 mm), guards shall not have openings which
allow passage of a sphere 43/8 inches (111 mm) in
diameter.
2. The triangular openings at the open sides of a stair,
formed by the riser, tread and bottom rail shall not
allow passage of a sphere 6 inches (152 mm) in diam-
eter.
3. At elevated walking surfaces for access to and use of
electrical, mechanical or plumbing systems or equip-
ment, guards shall not have openings which allow
passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.
4. In areas that are not open to the public within occu-
pancies in Group I-3, F, H or S, and for alternating
tread devices and ship ladders, guards shall not have
openings which allow passage of a sphere 21 inches
(533 mm) in diameter.
5. In assembly seating areas, guards at the end of aisles
where they terminate at a fascia of boxes, balconies
and galleries shall not have openings which allow
passage of a sphere 4 inches in diameter (102 mm) up
to a height of 26 inches (660 mm). From a height of 26
inches (660 mm) to 42 inches (1067 mm) above the
adjacent walking surfaces, guards shall not have
openings which allow passage of a sphere 8 inches
(203 mm) in diameter.
6. Within individual dwelling units and sleeping units in
Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, guards on the open
sides of stairs shall not have openings which allow
passage of a sphere 43/8 (111 mm) inches in diameter.
1013.4 Screen porches. Porches and decks which are enclosed
with insect screening shall be provided with guards where the
walking surface is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
the floor or grade below.
1013.5 Mechanical equipment. Guards shall be provided
where appliances, equipment, fans, roof hatch openings or
other components that require service are located within 10 feet
(3048 mm) of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and
such edge or open side is located more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above the floor, roof or grade below. The guard shall be con-
structed so as to prevent the passage of a sphere 21 inches (533
mm) in diameter. The guard shall extend not less than 30 inches
(762 mm) beyond each end of such appliance, equipment, fan
or component.
1013.6 Roof access. Guards shall be provided where the roof
hatch opening is located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a roof
edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open
side is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor,
roof or grade below. The guard shall be constructed so as to

MEANS OF EGRESS

prevent the passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diame-
ter.

SECTION 1014
EXIT ACCESS

1014.1 General. The exit access shall comply with the applica-
ble provisions of Sections 1003 through 1013. Exit access
arrangement shall comply with Sections 1014 through 1019.
1014.2 Egress through intervening spaces. Egress through
intervening spaces shall comply with this section.
1. Egress from a room or space shall not pass through
adjoining or intervening rooms or areas, except where
such adjoining rooms or areas and the area served are
accessory to one or the other, are not a Group H occu-
pancy and provide a discernible path of egress travel to
an exit.
Exception: Means of egress are not prohibited
through adjoining or intervening rooms or spaces in a
Group H, S or F occupancy when the adjoining or
intervening rooms or spaces are the same or a lesser
hazard occupancy group.
2. An exit access shall not pass through a room that can be
locked to prevent egress.
3. Means of egress from dwelling units or sleeping areas
shall not lead through other sleeping areas, toilet rooms
or bathrooms.
4. Egress shall not pass through kitchens, storage rooms,
closets or spaces used for similar purposes.
Exceptions:
1. Means of egress are not prohibited through a
kitchen area serving adjoining rooms constitut-
ing part of the same dwelling unit or sleeping
unit.
2. Means of egress are not prohibited through
stockrooms in Group M occupancies when all
of the following are met:
2.1. The stock is of the same hazard classifi-
cation as that found in the main retail
area;
2.2. Not more than 50 percent of the exit
access is through the stockroom;
2.3. The stockroom is not subject to locking
from the egress side; and
2.4. T h e r e i s a d em a r c a t e d , m i n im um
44-inch-wide (1118 mm) aisle defined
by full- or partial-height fixed walls or
similar construction that will maintain
the required width and lead directly
from the retail area to the exit without
obstructions.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

237

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:45 PM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

➡

1014.2.1 Multiple tenants. Where more than one tenant
occupies any one floor of a building or structure, each tenant
space, dwelling unit and sleeping unit shall be provided with
access to the required exits without passing through adja-
cent tenant spaces, dwelling units and sleeping units.
Exception: The means of egress from a smaller tenant
space shall not be prohibited from passing through a
larger adjoining tenant space where such rooms or
spaces of the smaller tenant occupy less than 10 percent
of the area of the larger tenant space through which they
pass; are the same or similar occupancy group; a
discernable path of egress travel to an exit is provided;
and the means of egress into the adjoining space is not
subject to locking from the egress side. A required means
of egress serving the larger tenant space shall not pass
through the smaller tenant space or spaces.
1014.2.2 Group I-2. Habitable rooms or suites in Group I-2
occupancies shall have an exit access door leading directly
to a corridor.
Exception: Rooms with exit doors opening directly to
the outside at ground level.
1014.2.3 Suites in patient sleeping areas. Patient sleeping
areas in Group I-2 occupancies shall be permitted to be
divided into suites with one intervening room if one of the
following conditions is met:
1. The intervening room within the suite is not used as an
exit access for more than eight patient beds.
2. The arrangement of the suite allows for direct and
constant visual supervision by nursing personnel.
1014.2.3.1 Area. Suites of sleeping rooms shall not
exceed 5,000 square feet (465 m2).
1014.2.3.2 Exit access. Any patient sleeping room, or
any suite that includes patient sleeping rooms, of more
than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall have at least two exit
access doors remotely located from each other.
1014.2.3.3 Travel distance. The travel distance between
any point in a suite of sleeping rooms and an exit access
door of that suite shall not exceed 100 feet (30 480 mm).
1014.2.4 Suites in areas other than patient sleeping
areas. Areas other than patient sleeping areas in Group I-2
occupancies shall be permitted to be divided into suites.
1014.2.4.1 Area. Suites of rooms, other than patient
sleeping rooms, shall not exceed 10,000 square feet (929
m2).
1014.2.4.2 Exit access. Any room or suite of rooms,
other than patient sleeping rooms, of more than 2,500
square feet (232 m2) shall have at least two exit access
doors remotely located from each other.
1014.2.4.3 One intervening room. For rooms other than
patient sleeping rooms, suites of rooms are permitted to
have one intervening room if the travel distance within

the suite to the exit access door is not greater than 100
feet (30 480 mm).
1014.2.4.4 Two intervening rooms. For rooms other
than patient sleeping rooms located within a suite, exit
access travel from within the suite shall be permitted
through two intervening rooms where the travel distance
to the exit access door is not greater than 50 feet (15 240
mm).
1014.2.5 Exit access through suites. Exit access from all
other portions of a building not classified as a suite in a
Group I-2 occupancy shall not pass through a suite.
1014.2.6 Travel distance. The travel distance between any
point in a Group I-2 occupancy patient sleeping room and an
exit access door in that room shall not e.
1014.2.7 Separation. Suites in Group I-2 occupancies shall
be separated from other portions of the building by a smoke
partition complying with Section 711.
1014.3 Common path of egress travel. In occupancies other
than Groups H-1, H-2 and H-3, the common path of egress
travel shall not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm). In Group H-1, H-2
and H-3 occupancies, the common path of egress travel shall
not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm). For common path of egress
travel in Group A occupancies and assembly occupancies
accessory to Group E occupancies having fixed seating, see
Section 1028.8.
Exceptions:

1. The length of a common path of egress travel in
Group B, F and S occupancies shall not be more than
100 feet (30 480 mm), provided that the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Where a tenant space in Group B, S and U occupan-
cies has an occupant load of not more than 30, the
length of a common path of egress travel shall not be
more than 100 feet (30 480 mm).
3. The length of a common path of egress travel in a
Group I-3 occupancy shall not be more than 100 feet
(30 480 mm).
4. The length of a common path of egress travel in a
Group R-2 occupancy shall not be more than 125 feet
(38 100 mm), provided that the building is protected
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2.

➡

SECTION 1015
EXIT AND EXIT ACCESS DOORWAYS
1015.1 Exits or exit access doorways from spaces. Two exits
or exit access doorways from any space shall be provided
where one of the following conditions exists:
Exception: Group I-2 occupancies shall comply with Sec-
tion 1014.2.2 through 1014.2.7.

238

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:45 PM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1. The occupant load of the space exceeds one of the values
in Table 1015.1.
Exception: In Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, one
means of egress is permitted within and from individ-
ual dwelling units with a maximum occupant load of
20 where the dwelling unit is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
2. The common path of egress travel exceeds one of the
limitations of Section 1014.3.
3. Where required by Section 1015.3, 1015.4, 1015.5, 1015.6
or 1015.6.1.
Where a building contains mixed occupancies, each individ-
ual occupancy shall comply with the applicable requirements
for that occupancy. Where applicable, cumulative occupant
loads from adjacent occupancies shall be considered in accor-
dance with the provisions of Section 1004.1.

TABLE 1015.1
SPACES WITH ONE EXIT OR EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY

OCCUPANCY

MAXIMUM OCCUPANT LOAD

A, B, Ea, F, M, U

H-1, H-2, H-3

H-4, H-5, I-1, I-3, I-4, R

S

49

3

10

29

a. Day care maximum occupant load is 10.

1015.1.1 Three or more exits or exit access doorways.
Three exits or exit access doorways shall be provided from
any space with an occupant load of 501 to 1,000. Four exits
or exit access doorways shall be provided from any space
with an occupant load greater than 1,000.
1015.2 Exit or exit access doorway arrangement. Required
exits shall be located in a manner that makes their availability
obvious. Exits shall be unobstructed at all times. Exit and exit
access doorways shall be arranged in accordance with Sections
1015.2.1 and 1015.2.2.
1015.2.1 Two exits or exit access doorways. Where two
exits or exit access doorways are required from any portion of
the exit access, the exit doors or exit access doorways shall be
placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the
length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the
building or area to be served measured in a straight line
between exit doors or exit access doorways. Interlocking or
scissor stairs shall be counted as one exit stairway.

Exceptions:
1. Where exit enclosures are provided as a portion
of the required exit and are interconnected by a
1-hour fire-resistance-rated corridor conforming
to the requirements of Section 1018, the required
exit separation shall be measured along the short-
est direct line of travel within the corridor.
2. Where a building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the separation distance

MEANS OF EGRESS

of the exit doors or exit access doorways shall not be
less than one-third of the length of the maximum
overall diagonal dimension of the area served.
1015.2.2 Three or more exits or exit access doorways.
Where access to three or more exits is required, at least two
exit doors or exit access doorways shall be arranged in
accordance with the provisions of Section 1015.2.1.
1015.3 Boiler, incinerator and furnace rooms. Two exit
access doorways are required in boiler, incinerator and furnace
rooms where the area is over 500 square feet (46 m2) and any
fuel-fired equipment exceeds 400,000 British thermal units
(Btu) (422 000 KJ) input capacity. Where two exit access door-
ways are required, one is permitted to be a fixed ladder or an
alternating tread device. Exit access doorways shall be sepa-
rated by a horizontal distance equal to one-half the length of the
maximum overall diagonal dimension of the room.
1015.4 Refrigeration machinery rooms. Machinery rooms
larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall have not less than
two exits or exit access doors. Where two exit access doorways
are required, one such doorway is permitted to be served by a
fixed ladder or an alternating tread device. Exit access door-
ways shall be separated by a horizontal distance equal to
one-half the maximum horizontal dimension of room.
All portions of machinery rooms shall be within 150 feet (45
720 mm) of an exit or exit access doorway. An increase in travel
distance is permitted in accordance with Section 1016.1.
Doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel, regardless
of the occupant load served. Doors shall be tight fitting and
self-closing.
1015.5 Refrigerated rooms or spaces. Rooms or spaces hav-
ing a floor area larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2), contain-
ing a refrigerant evaporator and maintained at a temperature
below 68°F (20°C), shall have access to not less than two exits
or exit access doors.
Travel distance shall be determined as specified in Section
1016.1, but all portions of a refrigerated room or space shall be
within 150 feet (45 720 mm) of an exit or exit access door
where such rooms are not protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system. Egress is allowed through adjoining refriger-
ated rooms or spaces.
Exception: Where using refrigerants in quantities limited
to the amounts based on the volume set forth in the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.

1015.6 Stage means of egress. Where two means of egress are
required, based on the stage size or occupant load, one means
of egress shall be provided on each side of the stage.
1015.6.1 Gallery, gridiron and catwalk means of egress.
The means of egress from lighting and access catwalks, gal-
leries and gridirons shall meet the requirements for occu-
pancies in Group F-2.
Exceptions:
1. A minimum width of 22 inches (559 mm) is per-
mitted for lighting and access catwalks.
2. Spiral stairs are permitted in the means of egress.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

239

10_ibc_2009pg239.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 1:06:13 PM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

3. Stairways required by this subsection need not be
enclosed.
4. Stairways with a minimum width of 22 inches (559
mm), ladders or spiral stairs are permitted in the
means of egress.
5. A second means of egress is not required from these
areas where a means of escape to a floor or to a roof
is provided. Ladders, alternating tread devices or
spiral stairs are permitted in the means of escape.
6. Ladders are permitted in the means of egress.

SECTION 1016
EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE
1016.1 Travel distance limitations. Exits shall be so located
on each story such that the maximum length of exit access
travel, measured from the most remote point within a story
along the natural and unobstructed path of egress travel to an
exterior exit door at the level of exit discharge, an entrance to a
vertical exit enclosure, an exit passageway, a horizontal exit, an
exterior exit stairway or an exterior exit ramp, shall not exceed
the distances given in Table 1016.1.
Exceptions:
1. Travel distance in open parking garages is permitted
to be measured to the closest riser of open exit stair-
ways.
2. In outdoor facilities with open exit access compo-
nents and open exterior exit stairways or exit ramps,
travel distance is permitted to be measured to the clos-
est riser of an exit stairway or the closest slope of the
exit ramp.
3. In other than occupancy Groups H and I, the exit
access travel distance to a maximum of 50 percent of
the exits is permitted to be measured from the most
remote point within a building to an exit using unen-
closed exit access stairways or ramps when connect-
ing a maximum of two stories. The two connected
stories shall be provided with at least two means of
egress. Such interconnected stories shall not be open
to other stories.
4. In other than occupancy Groups H and I, exit access
travel distance is permitted to be measured from the
most remote point within a building to an exit using
unenclosed exit access stairways or ramps in the first
and second stories above grade plane in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The first
and second stories above grade plane shall be pro-
vided with at least two means of egress. Such inter-
connected stories shall not be open to other stories.
Where applicable, travel distance on unenclosed exit access
stairways or ramps and on connecting stories shall also be
included in the travel distance measurement. The measurement
along stairways shall be made on a plane parallel and tangent to
the stair tread nosings in the center of the stairway.

TABLE 1016.1
EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCEa

OCCUPANCY

A, E, F-1, M, R, S-1
I-1
B
F-2, S-2, U
H-1
H-2
H-3
H-4
H-5
I-2, I-3, I-4

WITHOUT SPRINKLER
SYSTEM
(feet)

WITH SPRINKLER
SYSTEM
(feet)

200
Not Permitted
200
300
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted

250b
250c
300c
400c
75c
100c
150c
175c
200c
200c

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. See the following sections for modifications to exit access travel distance
requirements:
Section 402.4: For the distance limitation in malls.
Section 404.9: For the distance limitation through an atrium space.
Section 407.4: For the distance limitation in Group I-2.
Sections 408.6.1 and 408.8.1: For the distance limitations in Group I-3.
Section 411.4: For the distance limitation in special amusement buildings.
Section 1014.2.2: For the distance limitation in Group I-2 hospital suites.
Section 1015.4: For the distance limitation in refrigeration machinery
rooms.
Section 1015.5: For the distance limitation in refrigerated rooms and spaces.
Section 1021.2: For buildings with one exit.
Section 1028.7: For increased limitation in assembly seating.
Section 1028.7: For increased limitation for assembly open-air seating.
Section 3103.4: For temporary structures.
Section 3104.9: For pedestrian walkways.
b. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. See Section 903 for occupancies
where automatic sprinkler systems are permitted in accordance with Section
903.3.1.2.
c. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1.

1016.2 Exterior egress balcony increase. Travel distances
specified in Section 1016.1 shall be increased up to an additional
100 feet (30 480 mm) provided the last portion of the exit access
leading to the exit occurs on an exterior egress balcony con-
structed in accordance with Section 1019. The length of such
balcony shall not be less than the amount of the increase taken.

➡
➡

➡

SECTION 1017
AISLES

1017.1 General. Aisles serving as a portion of the exit access in
the means of egress system shall comply with the requirements
of this section. Aisles shall be provided from all occupied por-
tions of the exit access which contain seats, tables, furnishings,
displays and similar fixtures or equipment. Aisles serving
assembly areas shall comply with Section 1028. Aisles serving
reviewing stands, grandstands and bleachers shall also comply
with Section 1028. The required width of aisles shall be unob-
structed.
Exception: Doors complying with Section 1005.2.

240

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:46 PM

24

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

1017.2 Aisles in Groups B and M. In Group B and M occu-
pancies, the minimum clear aisle width shall be determined by
Section 1005.1 for the occupant load served, but shall not be
less than 36 inches (914 mm).
Exception: Nonpublic aisles serving less than 50 people
and not required to be accessible by Chapter 11 need not
exceed 28 inches (711 mm) in width.
1017.3 Aisle accessways in Group M. An aisle accessway
shall be provided on at least one side of each element within the
merchandise pad. The minimum clear width for an aisle
accessway not required to be accessible shall be 30 inches (762
mm). The required clear width of the aisle accessway shall be
measured perpendicular to the elements and merchandise
within the merchandise pad. The 30-inch (762 mm) minimum
clear width shall be maintained to provide a path to an adjacent
aisle or aisle accessway. The common path of travel shall not
exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) from any point in the merchandise
pad.
Exception: For areas serving not more than 50 occupants,
the common path of travel shall not exceed 75 feet (22 880
mm).
1017.4 Seating at tables. Where seating is located at a table or
counter and is adjacent to an aisle or aisle accessway, the mea-
surement of required clear width of the aisle or aisle accessway
shall be made to a line 19 inches (483 mm) away from and par-
allel to the edge of the table or counter. The 19-inch (483 mm)
distance shall be measured perpendicular to the side of the table
or counter. In the case of other side boundaries for aisle or aisle
accessways, the clear width shall be measured to walls, edges
of seating and tread edges, except that handrail projections are
permitted.
Exception: Where tables or counters are served by fixed
seats, the width of the aisle accessway shall be measured
from the back of the seat.
1017.4.1 Aisle accessway for tables and seating. Aisle
accessways serving arrangements of seating at tables or
counters shall have sufficient clear width to conform to the
capacity requirements of Section 1005.1 but shall not have
less than the appropriate minimum clear width specified in
Section 1017.4.2.

1017.4.2 Table and seating accessway width. Aisle
accessways shall provide a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm)
of width plus 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of width for each additional
1 foot (305 mm), or fraction thereof, beyond 12 feet (3658
mm) of aisle accessway length measured from the center of
the seat farthest from an aisle.
Exception: Portions of an aisle accessway having a
length not exceeding 6 feet (1829 mm) and used by a
total of not more than four persons.
1017.4.3 Table and seating aisle accessway length. The
length of travel along the aisle accessway shall not exceed
30 feet (9144 mm) from any seat to the point where a person
has a choice of two or more paths of egress travel to separate
exits.

SECTION 1018
CORRIDORS

1018.1 Construction. Corridors shall be fire-resistance rated
in accordance with Table 1018.1. The corridor walls required
to be fire-resistance rated shall comply with Section 709 for fire
partitions.

Exceptions:

1. A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in
an occupancy in Group E where each room that is used
for instruction has at least one door opening directly to
the exterior and rooms for assembly purposes have at
least one-half of the required means of egress doors
opening directly to the exterior. Exterior doors speci-
fied in this exception are required to be at ground level.
2. A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors
contained within a dwelling or sleeping unit in an
occupancy in Group R.
3. A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors
in open parking garages .
4. A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors
in an occupancy in Group B which is a space requiring
only a single means of egress complying with Section
1015.1.

TABLE 1018.1
CORRIDOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING

OCCUPANCY

OCCUPANT LOAD SERVED BY CORRIDOR

REQUIRED FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
With sprinkler systemc

Without sprinkler system

H-1, H-2, H-3

H-4, H-5

A, B, E, F, M, S, U

R

I-2a, I-4

I-1, I-3

All

Greater than 30

Greater than 30

Greater than 10

All

All

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

1

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

1

1

0

0.5

0

1b

a. For requirements for occupancies in Group I-2, see Sections 407.2 and 407.3.
b. For a reduction in the fire-resistance rating for occupancies in Group I-3, see Section 408.8.
c. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 where allowed.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

241

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:47 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

1018.2 Corridor width. The minimum corridor width shall be
as determined in Section 1005.1, but not less than 44 inches
(1118 mm).
Exceptions:
1. Twenty-four inches (610 mm)—For access to and uti-
lization of electrical, mechanical or plumbing sys-
tems or equipment.
2. Thirty-six inches (914 mm)—With a required occu-
pant capacity of less than 50.
3. Thirty-six inches (914 mm)—Within a dwelling unit.
4. Seventy-two inches (1829 mm)—In Group E with a
corridor having a required capacity of 100 or more.
5. Seventy-two inches (1829 mm)—In corridors and
areas serving gurney traffic in occupancies where
patients receive outpatient medical care, which
causes the patient to be not capable of self-preserva-
tion.
6. Ninety-six inches (2438 mm)—In Group I-2 in areas
where required for bed movement.
1018.3 Corridor obstruction. The required width of corri-
dors shall be unobstructed.
Exception: Doors complying with Section 1005.2.
1018.4 Dead ends. Where more than one exit or exit access
doorway is required, the exit access shall be arranged such that
there are no dead ends in corridors more than 20 feet (6096
mm) in length.
Exceptions:
1. In occupancies in Group I-3 of Occupancy Condition
2, 3 or 4 (see Section 308.4), the dead end in a corri-
dor shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).
2. In occupancies in Groups B, E, F, I-1, M, R-1, R-2,
R-4 , S and U , where the build ing is equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the length of the
dead-end corridors shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240
mm).
3. A dead-end corridor shall not be limited in length
where the length of the dead-end corridor is less than
2.5 times the least width of the dead-end corridor.
1018.5 Air movement in corridors. Corridors shall not serve
as supply, return, exhaust, relief or ventilation air ducts.
Exceptions:
1. Use of a corridor as a source of makeup air for
exhaust systems in rooms that open directly onto such
corridors, including toilet rooms, bathrooms, dress-
ing rooms, smoking lounges and janitor closets, shall
be permitted, provided that each such corridor is
directly supplied with outdoor air at a rate greater than
the rate of makeup air taken from the corridor.
2. Where located within a dwelling unit, the use of corri-
dors for conveying return air shall not be prohibited.

3. Where located within tenant spaces of 1,000 square
feet (93 m2) or less in area, utilization of corridors for
conveying return air is permitted.
4. Incidental air movement from pressurized rooms
within health care facilities, provided that the corri-
dor is not the primary source of supply or return to the
room.

1018.5.1 Corridor ceiling. Use of the space between the
corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above as a
return air plenum is permitted for one or more of the follow-
ing conditions:

1. The corridor is not required to be of fire-resis-
tance-rated construction;
2. The corridor is separated from the plenum by
fire-resistance-rated construction;
3. The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut
down upon activation of the air-handling unit smoke
detectors required by the International Mechanical
Code;
4. The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut
down upon detection of sprinkler waterflow where
the building is equipped throughout with an auto-
matic sprinkler system; or
5. The space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or
roof structure above the corridor is used as a compo-
nent of an approved engineered smoke control system.

1018.6 Corridor continuity. Fire-resistance-rated corridors
shall be continuous from the point of entry to an exit, and shall
not be interrupted by intervening rooms.

Exception: Foyers, lobbies or reception rooms constructed
as required for corridors shall not be construed as interven-
ing rooms.

SECTION 1019
EGRESS BALCONIES

1019.1 General. Balconies used for egress purposes shall con-
form to the same requirements as corridors for width, head-
room, dead ends and projections.

1019.2 Wall separation. Exterior egress balconies shall be
separated from the interior of the building by walls and opening
protectives as required for corridors.

Exception: Separation is not required where the exterior
egress balcony is served by at least two stairs and a dead-end
travel condition does not require travel past an unprotected
opening to reach a stair.

1019.3 Openness. The long side of an egress balcony shall be
at least 50 percent open, and the open area above the guards
shall be so distributed as to minimize the accumulation of
smoke or toxic gases.

242

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:47 PM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

SECTION 1020
EXITS

1020.1 General. Exits shall comply with Sections 1020
through 1026 and the applicable requirements of Sections 1003
through 1013. An exit shall not be used for any purpose that
interferes with its function as a means of egress. Once a given
level of exit protection is achieved, such level of protection
shall not be reduced until arrival at the exit discharge.
1020.2 Exterior exit doors. Buildings or structures used for
human occupancy shall have at least one exterior door that
meets the requirements of Section 1008.1.1.
1020.2.1 Detailed requirements. Exterior exit doors shall
comply with the applicable requirements of Section 1008.1.
1020.2.2 Arrangement. Exterior exit doors shall
lead
directly to the exit discharge or the public way.

SECTION 1021
NUMBER OF EXITS AND CONTINUITY

1021.1 Exits from stories. All spaces within each story shall
have access to the minimum number of approved independent
exits as specified in Table 1021.1 based on the occupant load of
the story. For the purposes of this chapter, occupied roofs shall
be provided with exits as required for stories.
Exceptions:
1. As modified by Section 403.5.2.
2. As modified by Section 1021.2.
3. Exit access stairways and ramps that comply with
Exception 3 or 4 of Section 1016.1 shall be permitted
to provide the minimum number of approved inde-
pendent exits required by Table 1021.1 on each story.
4. In Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, one means of
egress is permitted within and from individual dwell-
ing units with a maximum occupant load of 20 where

the dwelling unit is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
5. Within a story, rooms and spaces complying with
Section 1015.1 with exits that discharge directly to the
exterior at the level of exit discharge, are permitted to
have one exit.

TABLE 1021.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF EXITS FOR OCCUPANT LOAD

OCCUPANT LOAD
(persons per story)

1-500
501-1,000
More than 1,000

MINIMUM NUMBER OF EXITS
(per story)

2
3
4

1021.1.1 Exits maintained. The required number of exits
from any story shall be maintained until arrival at grade or
the public way.

1021.1.2 Parking structures. Parking structures shall not
have less than two exits from each parking tier, except that
only one exit is required where vehicles are mechanically
parked. Vehicle ramps shall not be considered as required
exits unless pedestrian facilities are provided.
1021.1.3 Helistops. The means of egress from helistops
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, provided
that landing areas located on buildings or structures shall
have two or more exits. For landing platforms or roof areas
less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) long, or less than 2,000 square
feet (186 m2) in area, the second means of egress is permit-
ted to be a fire escape, alternating tread device or ladder
leading to the floor below.
1021.2 Single exits. Only one exit shall be required from
Group R-3 occupancy buildings or from stories of other build-
ings as indicated in Table 1021.2. Occupancies shall be permit-
ted to have a single exit in buildings otherwise required to have
more than one exit if the areas served by the single exit do not

TABLE 1021.2
STORIES WITH ONE EXIT

STORY

OCCUPANCY

MAXIMUM OCCUPANTS (OR DWELLING UNITS)
PER FLOOR AND TRAVEL DISTANCE

A, Bd, Ee, Fd, M, U, Sd

49 occupants and 75 feet travel distance

First story or basement

Second story

Third story

H-2, H-3

H-4, H-5, I, R
Sa
Bb, F, M, Sa

R-2
R-2c

3 occupants and 25 feet travel distance

10 occupants and 75 feet travel distance

29 occupants and 100 feet travel distance

29 occupants and 75 feet travel distance

4 dwelling units and 50 feet travel distance

4 dwelling units and 50 feet travel distance

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. For the required number of exits for parking structures, see Section 1021.1.2.
b. For the required number of exits for air traffic control towers, see Section 412.3.
c. Buildings classified as Group R-2 equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and provided with
emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section 1029.
d. Group B, F and S occupancies in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall have a maximum
travel distance of 100 feet.
e. Day care occupancies shall have a maximum occupant load of 10.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

243

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:47 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

exceed the limitations of Table 1021.2. Mixed occupancies
shall be permitted to be served by single exits provided each
individual occupancy complies with the applicable require-
ments of Table 1021.2 for that occupancy. Where applicable,
cumulative occupant loads from adjacent occupancies shall be
considered in accordance with the provisions of Section
1004.1. Basements with a single exit shall not be located more
than one story below grade plane.
1021.3 Exit continuity. Exits shall be continuous from the
point of entry into the exit to the exit discharge.
1021.4 Exit door arrangement. Exit door arrangement shall
meet the requirements of Sections 1015.2 through 1015.2.2.

SECTION 1022
EXIT ENCLOSURES

1022.1 Enclosures required. Interior exit stairways and inte-
rior exit ramps shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed
in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both. Exit enclo-
sures shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours
where connecting four stories or more and not less than 1 hour
where connecting less than four stories. The number of stories
connected by the exit enclosure shall include any basements
but not any mezzanines. Exit enclosures shall have a fire-resis-
tance rating not less than the floor assembly penetrated, but
need not exceed 2 hours. Exit enclosures shall lead directly to
the exterior of the building or shall be extended to the exterior
of the building with an exit passageway conforming to the
requirements of Section 1023, except as permitted in Section
1027.1. An exit enclosure shall not be used for any purpose
other than means of egress.

Exceptions:
1. In all occupancies, other than Group H and I occupan-
cies, a stairway is not required to be enclosed when
the stairway serves an occupant load of less than 10
and the stairway complies with either Item 1.1 or 1.2.
In all cases, the maximum number of connecting open
stories shall not exceed two.
1.1. The stairway is open to not more than one
story above its level of exit discharge; or
1.2. The stairway is open to not more than one
story below its level of exit discharge.
2. Exits in buildings of Group A-5 where all portions of
the means of egress are essentially open to the outside
need not be enclosed.
3. Stairways serving and contained within a single resi-
dential dwelling unit or sleeping unit in Group R-1,
R-2 or R-3 occupancies are not required to be
enclosed.
4. Stairways in open parking structures that serve only
the parking structure are not required to be enclosed.
5. Stairways in Group I-3 occupancies, as provided for
in Section 408.3.8, are not required to be enclosed.
6. Means of egress stairways as required by Sections
410.5.3 and 1015.6.1 are not required to be enclosed.

➡

➡

7. Means of egress stairways from balconies, galleries
or press boxes as provided for in Section 1028.5.1 are
not required to be enclosed.
1022.2 Termination. Exit enclosures shall terminate at an exit
discharge or a public way.
Exception: An exit enclosure shall be permitted to termi-
nate at an exit passageway complying with Section 1023,
provided the exit passageway terminates at an exit discharge
or a public way.
1022.2.1 Extension. Where an exit enclosure is extended to
an exit discharge or a public way by an exit passageway, the
exit enclosure shall be separated from the exit passageway
by a fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707
or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with
Section 712, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be at
least equal to that required for the exit enclosure. A fire door
assembly complying with Section 715.4 shall be installed in
the fire barrier to provide a means of egress from the exit
enclosure to the exit passageway. Openings in the fire bar-
rier other than the fire door assembly are prohibited. Pene-
trations of the fire barrier are prohibited.
Exception: Penetrations of the fire barrier in accordance
with Section 1022.4 shall be permitted.
1022.3 Openings and penetrations. Exit enclosure opening
protectives shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Section 715.
Openings in exit enclosures other than unprotected exterior
openings shall be limited to those necessary for exit access to
the enclosure from normally occupied spaces and for egress
from the enclosure.
Elevators shall not open into an exit enclosure.
1022.4 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through
an exit enclosure are prohibited except for required exit doors,
equipment and ductwork necessary for independent ventilation
or pressurization, sprinkler piping, standpipes, electrical race-
way for fire department communication systems and electrical
raceway serving the exit enclosure and terminating at a steel
box not exceeding 16 square inches (0.010 m2). Such penetra-
tions shall be protected in accordance with Section 713. There
shall be no penetrations or communication openings, whether
protected or not, between adjacent exit enclosures.
1022.5 Ventilation. Equipment and ductwork for exit enclo-
sure ventilation as permitted by Section 1022.4 shall comply
with one of the following items:
1. Such equipment and ductwork shall be located exterior
to the building and shall be directly connected to the exit
enclosure by ductwork enclosed in construction as
required for shafts.
2. Where such equipment and ductwork is located within
the exit enclosure, the intake air shall be taken directly
from the outdoors and the exhaust air shall be discharged
directly to the outdoors, or such air shall be conveyed
through ducts enclosed in construction as required for
shafts.
3. Where located within the building, such equipment and
ductwork shall be separated from the remainder of the

244

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:48 PM

28

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

building, including other mechanical equipment, with
construction as required for shafts.
In each case, openings into the fire-resistance-rated con-
struction shall be limited to those needed for maintenance and
operation and shall be protected by opening protectives in
accordance with Section 715 for shaft enclosures.
Exit enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of
other building ventilation systems.
1022.6 Exit enclosure exterior walls. Exterior walls of an exit
enclosure shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for
exterior walls. Where nonrated walls or unprotected openings
enclose the exterior of the stairway and the walls or openings are
exposed by other parts of the building at an angle of less than 180
degrees (3.14 rad), the building exterior walls within 10 feet
(3048 mm) horizontally of a nonrated wall or unprotected open-
ing shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.
Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by open-
ing protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4
hour. This construction shall extend vertically from the ground
to a point 10 feet (3048 mm) above the topmost landing of the
stairway or to the roof line, whichever is lower.
1022.7 Discharge identification. A stairway in an exit enclo-
sure shall not continue below its level of exit discharge unless
an approved barrier is provided at the level of exit discharge to
prevent persons from unintentionally continuing into levels
below. Directional exit signs shall be provided as specified in
Section 1011.
1022.8 Floor identification signs. A sign shall be provided at
each floor landing in exit enclosures connecting more than
three stories designating the floor level, the terminus of the top
and bottom of the exit enclosure and the identification of the
stair or ramp. The signage shall also state the story of, and the
direction to, the exit discharge and the availability of roof
access from the enclosure for the fire department. The sign
shall be located 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor landing in a
position that is readily visible when the doors are in the open
and closed positions. Floor level identification signs in tactile
characters complying with ICC A117.1 shall be located at each
floor level landing adjacent to the door leading from the enclo-
sure into the corridor to identify the floor level.
1022.8.1 Signage requirements. Stairway identification
signs shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. The signs shall be a minimum size of 18 inches (457
mm) by 12 inches (305 mm).
2. The letters designating the identification of the stair
enclosure shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm)
in height.
3. The number designating the floor level shall be a min-
imum of 5 inches (127 mm) in height and located in
the center of the sign.
4. All other lettering and numbers shall be a minimum of
1 inch (25 mm) in height.
5. Cha rac te r s and the i r backg round sha l l have a
nonglare finish. Characters shall contrast with their
background, with either light characters on a dark
background or dark characters on a light background.

MEANS OF EGRESS

6. When signs required by Section 1022.8 are installed
in interior exit enclosures of buildings subject to Sec-
tion 1024, the signs shall be made of the same materi-
als as required by Section 1024.4.
1022.9 Smokeproof enclosures and pressurized stairways.
In buildings required to comply with Section 403 or 405, each
of the exit enclosures serving a story with a floor surface
located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access or more than 30 feet (9144
mm) below the finished floor of a level of exit discharge serving
such stories shall be a smokeproof enclosure or pressurized
stairway in accordance with Section 909.20.
1022.9.1 Termination and extension. A smokeproof
enclosure or pressurized stairway shall terminate at an exit
discharge or a public way. The smokeproof enclosure or
pressurized stairway shall be permitted to be extended by an
exit passageway in accordance with Section 1022.2. The
exit passageway shall be without openings other than the
fire door assembly required by Section 1022.2 and those
necessary for egress from the exit passageway. The exit pas-
sageway shall be separated from the remainder of the build-
ing by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with
Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accor-
dance with Section 712, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Open ing s in the ex i t passageway se rv ing a
smokeproof enclosure are permitted where the exit
passageway is protected and pressurized in the
same manner as the smokeproof enclosure, and
openings are protected as required for access from
other floors.
2. Openings in the exit passageway serving a pres-
surized stairway are permitted where the exit pas-
sageway is protected and pressurized in the same
manner as the pressurized stairway.
3. The fire barrier separating the smokeproof enclo-
sure or pressurized stairway from the exit pas-
sag ewa y i s no t r equ i r ed , p rov id ed th e ex i t
passageway is protected and pressurized in the
same manner as the smokeproof enclosure or pres-
surized stairway.
4. A smokeproof enclosure or pressurized stairway
shall be permitted to egress through areas on the
level of discharge or vestibules as permitted by
Section 1027.
1022.9.2 Enclosure access. Access to the stairway within a
smokeproof enclosure shall be by way of a vestibule or an
open exterior balcony.
Exception: Access is not required by way of a vestibule
or exterior balcony for stairways using the pressurization
alternative complying with Section 909.20.5.

SECTION 1023
EXIT PASSAGEWAYS

1023.1 Exit passageway. Exit passageways serving as an exit
component in a means of egress system shall comply with the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

245

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:48 PM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

requirements of this section. An exit passageway shall not be
used for any purpose other than as a means of egress.
1023.2 Width. The width of exit passageways shall be deter-
mined as specified in Section 1005.1 but such width shall not
be less than 44 inches (1118 mm), except that exit passageways
serving an occupant load of less than 50 shall not be less than
36 inches (914 mm) in width. The required width of exit pas-
sageways shall be unobstructed.
Exception: Doors complying with Section 1005.2.
1023.3 Construction. Exit passageway enclosures shall have
walls, floors and ceilings of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance
rating, and not less than that required for any connecting exit
enclosure. Exit passageways shall be constructed as fire barri-
ers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or both.
1023.4 Termination. Exit passageways shall terminate at an
exit discharge or a public way.

1023.5 Openings and penetrations. Exit passageway opening
protectives shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Section 715.
Except as permitted in Section 402.4.6, openings in exit pas-
sageways other than exterior openings shall be limited to those
necessary for exit access to the exit passageway from normally
occupied spaces and for egress from the exit passageway.
Where an exit enclosure is extended to an exit discharge or a
public way by an exit passageway, the exit passageway shall
also comply with Section 1022.2.1.
Elevators shall not open into an exit passageway.
1023.6 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through
an exit passageway are prohibited except for required exit
doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for independent
pressurization, sprinkler piping, standpipes, electrical raceway
for fire department communication and electrical raceway
serving the exit passageway and terminating at a steel box not
exceeding 16 square inches (0.010 m2). Such penetrations shall
be protected in accordance with Section 713. There shall be no
penetrations or communicating openings, whether protected or
not, between adjacent exit passageways.

SECTION 1024
LUMINOUS EGRESS PATH MARKINGS

1024.1 General. Approved luminous egress path markings
delineating the exit path shall be provided in buildings of
Groups A, B, E, I, M and R-1 having occupied floors located
more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access in accordance with Sections 1024.1
through 1024.5.
Exceptions:
1. Luminous egress path markings shall not be required
on the level of exit discharge in lobbies that serve as
part of the exit path in accordance with Section
1027.1, Exception 1.
2. Luminous egress path markings shall not be required
in areas of open parking garages that serve as part of

the exit path in accordance with Section 1027.1,
Exception 3.
1024.2 Markings within exit enclosures. Egress path mark-
ings shall be provided in exit enclosures, including vertical exit
enclosures and exit passageways, in accordance with Sections
1024.2.1 through 1024.2.6.
1024.2.1 Steps. A solid and continuous stripe shall be
applied to the horizontal leading edge of each step and shall
extend for the full length of the step. Outlining stripes shall
have a minimum horizontal width of 1 inch (25 mm) and a
maximum width of 2 inches (51 mm). The leading edge of
the stripe shall be placed at a maximum of 1/2 inch (13 mm)
from the leading edge of the step and the stripe shall overlap
the leading edge of the step by not more than 1/2 inch (13
mm) down the vertical face of the step.
Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall
not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with
UL 1994.
1024.2.2 Landings. The leading edge of landings shall be
marked with a stripe consistent with the dimensional
requirements for steps.
1024.2.3 Handrails. All handrails and handrail extensions
shall be marked with a solid and continuous stripe having a
minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm). The stripe shall be
placed on the top surface of the handrail for the entire length
of the handrail, including extensions and newel post caps.
Where handrails or handrail extensions bend or turn cor-
ners, the stripe shall not have a gap of more than 4 inches
(102 mm).
Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall
not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with
UL 1994.
1024.2.4 Perimeter demarcation lines. Stair landings and
other floor areas within exit enclosures, with the exception
of the sides of steps, shall be provided with solid and contin-
uous demarcation lines on the floor or on the walls or a com-
bination of both. The stripes shall be 1 to 2 inches (25 mm to
51 mm) wide with interruptions not exceeding 4 inches (102
mm).
Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall
not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with
UL 1994.
1024.2.4.1 Floor-mounted demarcation lines. Perime-
ter demarcation lines shall be placed within 4 inches (102
mm) of the wall and shall extend to within 2 inches (51
mm) of the markings on the leading edge of landings.
The demarcation lines shall continue across the floor in
front of all doors.
Exception: Demarcation lines shall not extend in
front of exit doors that lead out of an exit enclosure
and through which occupants must travel to complete
the exit path.
1024.2.4.2 Wall-mounted demarcation lines. Perime-
ter demarcation lines shall be placed on the wall with the
bottom edge of the stripe no more than 4 inches (102
mm) above the finished floor. At the top or bottom of the

246

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:49 PM

30

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

stairs, demarcation lines shall drop vertically to the floor
within 2 inches (51 mm) of the step or landing edge.
Demarcation lines on walls shall transition vertically to
the floor and then extend across the floor where a line on
the floor is the only practical method of outlining the
path. Where the wall line is broken by a door, demarca-
tion lines on walls shall continue across the face of the
door or transition to the floor and extend across the floor
in front of such door.
Exception: Demarcation lines shall not extend in
front of exit doors that lead out of an exit enclosure
and through which occupants must travel to complete
the exit path.
1024.2.4.3 Transition. Where a wall-mounted demarca-
tion line transitions to a floor-mounted demarcation line,
or vice versa, the wall-mounted demarcation line shall
drop vertically to the floor to meet a complementary
extension of the floor-mounted demarcation line, thus
forming a continuous marking.
1024.2.5 Obstacles. Obstacles at or below 6 feet 6 inches
(1981 mm) in height and projecting more than 4 inches (102
mm) into the egress path shall be outlined with markings no
less than 1 inch (25 mm) in width comprised of a pattern of
alternating equal bands, of luminescent luminous material
and black, with the alternating bands no more than 2 inches
(51 mm) thick and angled at 45 degrees (0.79 rad). Obsta-
cles shall include, but are not limited to, standpipes, hose
cabinets, wall projections and restricted height areas. How-
ever, such markings shall not conceal any required informa-
tion or indicators including, but not limited to, instructions
to occupants for the use of standpipes.
1024.2.6 Doors from exit enclosures. Doors through
which occupants within an exit enclosure must pass in order
to complete the exit path shall be provided with markings
complying with Sections 1024.2.6.1 through 1024.2.6.3.
1024.2.6.1 Emergency exit symbol. The doors shall be
identified by a low-location luminous emergency exit
symbol complying with NFPA 170. The exit symbol
shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in height and
shall be mounted on the door, centered horizontally, with
the top of the symbol no higher than 18 inches (457 mm)
above the finished floor.
1024.2.6.2 Door hardware markings. Door hardware
shall be marked with no less than 16 square inches (406
mm2) of luminous material. This marking shall be
located behind, immediately adjacent to or on the door
handle and/or escutcheon. Where a panic bar is installed,
such material shall be no less than 1 inch (25 mm) wide
for the entire length of the actuating bar or touchpad.
1024.2.6.3 Door frame markings. The top and sides of
the door frame shall be marked with a solid and continu-
ous 1 inch to 2 inch (25 mm to 51 mm) wide stripe.
Where the door molding does not provide sufficient flat
surface on which to locate the stripe, the stripe shall be
permitted to be located on the wall surrounding the
frame.

MEANS OF EGRESS

1024.3 Uniformity. Placement and dimensions of markings
shall be consistent and uniform throughout the same exit enclo-
sure.

1024.4 Self-luminous and photoluminescent. Luminous
egress path markings shall be permitted to be made of any
material, including paint, provided that an electrical charge is
not required to maintain the required luminance. Such materi-
als shall include, but are not limited to, self-luminous materials
and photoluminescent materials. Materials shall comply with
either:
1. UL 1994; or
2. ASTM E 2072, except that the charging source shall be 1
foot-candle (11 lux) of fluorescent illumination for 60
minutes, and the minimum luminance shall be 30
millicandelas per square meter at 10 minutes and 5
millicandelas per square meter after 90 minutes.
1024.5 Illumination. Exit enclosures where photoluminescent
exit path markings are installed shall be provided with the mini-
mum means of egress illumination required by Section 1006
for at least 60 minutes prior to periods when the building is
occupied.

SECTION 1025
HORIZONTAL EXITS

1025.1 Horizontal exits. Horizontal exits serving as an exit in
a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of
this section. A horizontal exit shall not serve as the only exit
from a portion of a building, and where two or more exits are
required, not more than one-half of the total number of exits or
total exit width shall be horizontal exits.
Exceptions:
1. Horizontal exits are permitted to comprise two-thirds
of the required exits from any building or floor area
for occupancies in Group I-2.
2. Horizontal exits are permitted to comprise 100 per-
cent of the exits required for occupancies in Group
I-3. At least 6 square feet (0.6 m2) of accessible space
per occupant shall be provided on each side of the
horizontal exit for the total number of people in
adjoining compartments.
1025.2 Separation. The separation between buildings or ref-
uge areas connected by a horizontal exit shall be provided by a
fire wall complying with Section 706; or it shall be provided by
a fire barrier complying with Section 707 or a horizontal
assembly complying with Section 712, or both. The minimum
fire-resistance rating of the separation shall be 2 hours. Open-
ing protectives in horizontal exits shall also comply with Sec-
tion 715. Duct and air transfer openings in a fire wall or fire
barrier that serves as a horizontal exit shall also comply with
Section 716. The horizontal exit separation shall extend verti-
cally through all levels of the building unless floor assemblies
have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours with no
unprotected openings.
Exception: A fire-resistance rating is not required at hori-
zontal exits between a building area and an above-grade

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

247

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:49 PM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

pedestrian walkway constructed in accordance with Section
3104, provided that the distance between connected build-
ings is more than 20 feet (6096 mm).
Horizontal exits constructed as fire barriers shall be continu-
ous from exterior wall to exterior wall so as to divide com-
pletely the floor served by the horizontal exit.
1025.3 Opening protectives. Fire doors in horizontal exits
shall be self-closing or automatic-closing when activated by a
smoke detector in accordance with Section 715.4.8.3. Doors,
where located in a cross-corridor condition, shall be auto-
matic-closing by activation of a smoke detector installed in
accordance with Section 715.4.8.3.
1025.4 Capacity of refuge area. The refuge area of a horizon-
tal exit shall be a space occupied by the same tenant or a public
area and each such refuge area shall be adequate to accommo-
date the original occupant load of the refuge area plus the occu-
pant load anticipated from the adjoining compartment. The
anticipated occupant load from the adjoining compartment
shall be based on the capacity of the horizontal exit doors enter-
ing the refuge area. The capacity of the refuge area shall be
computed based on a net floor area allowance of 3 square feet
(0.2787 m2) for each occupant to be accommodated therein.
Exception: The net floor area allowable per occupant shall
be as follows for the indicated occupancies:
1. Six square feet (0.6 m2) per occupant for occupancies
in Group I-3.
2. Fifteen square feet (1.4 m2) per occupant for ambula-
tory occupancies in Group I-2.
3. T h i r t y s q u a r e f e e t ( 2 . 8 m 2 ) p e r o c c u p a n t f o r
nonambulatory occupancies in Group I-2.
The refuge area into which a horizontal exit leads shall be
provided with exits adequate to meet the occupant require-
ments of this chapter, but not including the added occupant
load imposed by persons entering it through horizontal exits
from other areas. At least one refuge area exit shall lead directly
to the exterior or to an exit enclosure.
Exception: The adjoining compartment shall not be
required to have a stairway or door leading directly outside,
provided the refuge area into which a horizontal exit leads
has stairways or doors leading directly outside and are so
arranged that egress shall not require the occupants to return
through the compartment from which egress originates.

SECTION 1026
EXTERIOR EXIT RAMPS AND STAIRWAYS
1026.1 Exterior exit ramps and stairways. Exterior exit
ramps and stairways serving as an element of a required means
of egress shall comply with this section.
Exception: Exterior exit ramps and stairways for outdoor
stadiums complying with Section 1022.1, Exception 2.
1026.2 Use in a means of egress. Exterior exit stairways shall
not be used as an element of a required means of egress for
Group I-2 occupancies. For occupancies in other than Group
I-2, exterior exit ramps and stairways shall be permitted as an
element of a required means of egress for buildings not exceed-

ing six stories above grade plane or having occupied floors
more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access.
1026.3 Open side. Exterior exit ramps and stairways serving
as an element of a required means of egress shall be open on at
least one side. An open side shall have a minimum of 35 square
feet (3.3 m2) of aggregate open area adjacent to each floor level
and the level of each intermediate landing. The required open
area shall be located not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above
the adjacent floor or landing level.
1026.4 Side yards. The open areas adjoining exterior exit
ramps or stairways shall be either yards, courts or public ways;
the remaining sides are permitted to be enclosed by the exterior
walls of the building.
1026.5 Location. Exterior exit ramps and stairways shall be
located in accordance with Section 1027.3.
1026.6 Exterior ramps and stairway protection. Exterior
exit ramps and stairways shall be separated from the interior of
the building as required in Section 1022.1. Openings shall be
limited to those necessary for egress from normally occupied
spaces.
Exceptions:
1. Separation from the interior of the building is not
required for occupancies, other than those in Group
R-1 or R-2, in buildings that are no more than two sto-
ries above grade plane where a level of exit discharge
serving such occupancies is the first story above
grade plane.
2. Separation from the interior of the building is not
required where the exterior ramp or stairway is
served by an exterior ramp or balcony that connects
two remote exterior stairways or other approved
exits, with a perimeter that is not less than 50 percent
open. To be considered open, the opening shall be a
minimum of 50 percent of the height of the enclosing
wall, with the top of the openings no less than 7 feet
(2134 mm) above the top of the balcony.
3. Separation from the interior of the building is not
required for an exterior ramp or stairway located in a
building or structure that is permitted to have unen-
closed interior stairways in accordance with Section
1022.1.
4. Separation from the interior of the building is not
required for exterior ramps or stairways connected to
open-ended corr idors , p rov ided tha t I tems 4 .1
through 4.4 are met:
4.1. The building, including corridors and ramps
and stairs, shall be equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
4.2. The open-ended corridors comply with Sec-
tion 1018.
4.3. The open-ended corridors are connected on
each end to an exterior exit ramp or stairway
complying with Section 1026.

248

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:50 PM

32

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

4.4. At any location in an open-ended corridor
where a change of direction exceeding 45 de-
grees (0.79 rad) occurs, a clear opening of not
less than 35 square feet (3.3 m2) or an exterior
ramp or stairway shall be provided. Where
clear openings are provided, they shall be lo-
cated so as to minimize the accumulation of
smoke or toxic gases.

SECTION 1027
EXIT DISCHARGE

1027.1 General. Exits shall discharge directly to the exterior of
the building. The exit discharge shall be at grade or shall pro-
vide direct access to grade. The exit discharge shall not reenter
a building. The combined use of Exceptions 1 and 2 below shall
not exceed 50 percent of the number and capacity of the
required exits.
Exceptions:
1. A maximum of 50 percent of the number and capacity
of the exit enclosures is permitted to egress through
areas on the level of discharge provided all of the fol-
lowing are met:
1.1. Such exit enclosures egress to a free and un-
obstructed path of travel to an exterior exit
door and such exit is readily visible and identi-
fiable from the point of termination of the exit
enclosure.
1.2. The entire area of the level of exit discharge is
separated from areas below by construction
conforming to the fire-resistance rating for
the exit enclosure.
1.3. The egress path from the exit enclosure on the
level of exit discharge is protected throughout
by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
All portions of the level of exit discharge with
access to the egress path shall either be pro-
tected throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, or separated from the
egress path in accordance with the require-
ments for the enclosure of exits.
2. A maximum of 50 percent of the number and capacity
of the exit enclosures is permitted to egress through a
vestibule provided all of the following are met:
2.1. The entire area of the vestibule is separated
from areas below by construction conforming
to the fire-resistance rating for the exit enclo-
sure.
2.2. The depth from the exterior of the building is
not greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) and the
length is not greater than 30 feet (9144 mm).
2.3. The area is separated from the remainder of
the level of exit discharge by construction pro-
viding protection at least the equivalent of ap-
proved wired glass in steel frames.

MEANS OF EGRESS

2.4. The area is used only for means of egress and
exits directly to the outside.
3. Stairways in open parking garages complying with
Section 1022.1, Exception 4, are permitted to egress
through the open parking garage at their levels of exit
discharge.
4. Horizontal exits complying with Section 1025 shall
not be required to discharge directly to the exterior of
the building.
1027.2 Exit discharge capacity. The capacity of the exit dis-
charge shall be not less than the required discharge capacity of
the exits being served.
1027.3 Exit discharge location. Exterior balconies, stairways
and ramps shall be located at least 10 feet (3048 mm) from
adjacent lot lines and from other buildings on the same lot
unless the adjacent building exterior walls and openings are
protected in accordance with Section 704 based on fire separa-
tion distance.

1027.4 Exit discharge components. Exit discharge compo-
nents shall be sufficiently open to the exterior so as to minimize
the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases.
1027.5 Egress courts. Egress courts serving as a portion of the
exit discharge in the means of egress system shall comply with
the requirements of Section 1027.
1027.5.1 Width. The width of egress courts shall be deter-
mined as specified in Section 1005.1, but such width shall
not be less than 44 inches (1118 mm), except as specified
herein. Egress courts serving Group R-3 and U occupancies
shall not be less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width. The
required width of egress courts shall be unobstructed to a
height of 7 feet (2134 mm).
Exception: Doors complying with Section 1005.2.
Where an egress court exceeds the minimum required
width and the width of such egress court is then reduced
along the path of exit travel, the reduction in width shall be
gradual. The transition in width shall be affected by a guard
not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height and shall not cre-
ate an angle of more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) with respect
to the axis of the egress court along the path of egress travel.
In no case shall the width of the egress court be less than the
required minimum.
1027.5.2 Construction and openings. Where an egress
court serving a building or portion thereof is less than 10
feet (3048 mm) in width, the egress court walls shall have
not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a
distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) above the floor of the court.
Openings within such walls shall be protected by opening
protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4
hour.
Exceptions:

1. Egress courts serving an occupant load of less
than 10.
2. Egress courts serving Group R-3.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

249

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:50 PM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

1027.6 Access to a public way. The exit discharge shall pro-
vide a direct and unobstructed access to a public way.
Exception: Where access to a public way cannot be pro-
vided, a safe dispersal area shall be provided where all of the
following are met:
1. The area shall be of a size to accommodate at least
5 square feet (0.46 m2) for each person.
2. The area shall be located on the same lot at least 50
feet (15 240 mm) away from the building requiring
egress.
3. The area shall be permanently maintained and
identified as a safe dispersal area.
4. The area shall be provided with a safe and unob-
structed path of travel from the building.

SECTION 1028
ASSEMBLY

1028.1 General. Occupancies in Group A and assembly occu-
pancies accessory to Group E which contain seats, tables, dis-
plays, equipment or other material shall comply with this
section.
1028.1.1 Bleachers. Bleachers, grandstands and folding
and telescopic seating, that are not building elements, shall
comply with ICC 300.
1028.2 Assembly main exit. Group A occupancies and assem-
bly occupancies accessory to Group E occupancies that have an
occupant load of greater than 300 shall be provided with a main
exit. The main exit shall be of sufficient width to accommodate
not less than one-half of the occupant load, but such width shall
not be less than the total required width of all means of egress
leading to the exit. Where the building is classified as a Group
A occupancy, the main exit shall front on at least one street or an
unoccupied space of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in width
that adjoins a street or public way.
Exception: In assembly occupancies where there is no
well-defined main exit or where multiple main exits are pro-
vided, exits shall be permitted to be distributed around the
perimeter of the building provided that the total width of
egress is not less than 100 percent of the required width.
1028.3 Assembly other exits. In addition to having access to a
main exit, each level in Group A occupancies or assembly
occupancies accessory to Group E occupancies having an
occupant load greater than 300, shall be provided with addi-
tional means of egress that shall provide an egress capacity for
at least one-half of the total occupant load served by that level
and comply with Section 1015.2.
Exception: In assembly occupancies where there is no
well-defined main exit or where multiple main exits are pro-
vided, exits shall be permitted to be distributed around the
perimeter of the building, provided that the total width of
egress is not less than 100 percent of the required width.
1028.4 Foyers and lobbies. In Group A-1 occupancies, where
persons are admitted to the building at times when seats are not
available, such persons shall be allowed to wait in a lobby or
similar space, provided such lobby or similar space shall not

encroach upon the required clear width of the means of egress.
Such foyer, if not directly connected to a public street by all the
main entrances or exits, shall have a straight and unobstructed
corridor or path of travel to every such main entrance or exit.
1028.5 Interior balcony and gallery means of egress. For
balconies, galleries or press boxes having a seating capacity of
50 or more located in Group A occupancies, at least two means
of egress shall be provided, with one from each side of every
balcony, gallery or press box and at least one leading directly to
an exit.

1028.5.1 Enclosure of openings. Interior stairways and
other vertical openings shall be enclosed in an exit enclosure
as provided in Section 1022.1, except that stairways are per-
mitted to be open between the balcony, gallery or press box
and the main assembly floor in occupancies such as the-
aters, places of religious worship, auditoriums and sports
facilities. At least one accessible means of egress is required
from a balcony, gallery or press box level containing acces-
sible seating locations in accordance with Section 1007.3 or
1007.4.
1028.6 Width of means of egress for assembly. The clear width
of aisles and other means of egress shall comply with Section
1028.6.1 where smoke-protected seating is not provided and with
Section 1028.6.2 or 1028.6.3 where smoke-protected seating is
provided. The clear width shall be measured to walls, edges of
seating and tread edges except for permitted projections.
1028.6.1 Without smoke protection. The clear width of
the means of egress shall provide sufficient capacity in
accordance with all of the following, as applicable:
1. At least 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) of width for each occupant
served shall be provided on stairs having riser heights
7 inches (178 mm) or less and tread depths 11 inches
(279 mm) or greater, measured horizontally between
tread nosings.
2. At least 0.005 inch (0.127 mm) of additional stair
width for each occupant shall be provided for each 0.10
inch (2.5 mm) of riser height above 7 inches (178 mm).
3. Where egress requires stair descent, at least 0.075
inch (1.9 mm) of additional width for each occupant
shall be provided on those portions of stair width hav-
ing no handrail within a horizontal distance of 30
inches (762 mm).
4. Ramped means of egress, where slopes are steeper
than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent
slope), shall have at least 0.22 inch (5.6 mm) of clear
width for each occupant served. Level or ramped
means of egress, where slopes are not steeper than one
unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope),
shall have at least 0.20 inch (5.1 mm) of clear width
for each occupant served.
1028.6.2 Smoke-protected seating. The clear width of the

means of egress for smoke-protected assembly seating shall
not be less than the occupant load served by the egress ele-
ment multiplied by the appropriate factor in Table 1028.6.2.
The total number of seats specified shall be those within the
space exposed to the same smoke-protected environment.
Interpolation is permitted between the specific values

250

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:51 PM

34

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

shown. A life safety evaluation, complying with NFPA 101,
shall be done for a facility utilizing the reduced width
requirements of Table 1028.6.2 for smoke-protected assem-
bly seating.
Exception: For an outdoor smoke-protected assembly
with an occupant load not greater than 18,000, the clear
width shall be determined using the factors in Section
1028.6.3.
1028.6.2.1 Smoke control. Means of egress serving a

smoke-protected assembly seating area shall be provided
with a smoke control system complying with Section
909 or natural ventilation designed to maintain the
smoke level at least 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor of
the means of egress.
1028.6.2.2 Roof height. A smoke-protected assembly
seating area with a roof shall have the lowest portion of
the roof deck not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) above the
highest aisle or aisle accessway.
Exception: A roof canopy in an outdoor stadium
shall be permitted to be less than 15 feet (4572 mm)
above the highest aisle or aisle accessway provided
that there are no objects less than 80 inches (2032
mm) above the highest aisle or aisle accessway.
1028.6.2.3 Automatic sprinklers. Enclosed areas with
walls and ceilings in buildings or structures containing
smoke-protected assembly seating shall be protected
with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accor-
dance with Section 903.3.1.1.
Exceptions:
1. The floor area used for contests, performances
or entertainment provided the roof construction
is more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above the
floor level and the use is restricted to low fire
hazard uses.
2. Press boxes and storage facilities less than
1,000 square feet (93 m2) in area.
3. Outdoor seating facilities where seating and the
means of egress in the seating area are essen-
tially open to the outside.

1028.6.3 Width of means of egress
for outdoor
smoke-protected assembly. The clear width in inches
(mm) of aisles and other means of egress shall be not less
than the total occupant load served by the egress element
multiplied by 0.08 (2.0 mm) where egress is by aisles and
stairs and multiplied by 0.06 (1.52 mm) where egress is by
ramps, corridors, tunnels or vomitories.
Exception: The clear width in inches (mm) of aisles and
other means of egress shall be permitted to comply with
Section 1028.6.2 for the number of seats in the outdoor
smoke-protected assembly where Section 1028.6.2 per-
mits less width.
1028.7 Travel distance. Exits and aisles shall be so located that
the travel distance to an exit door shall not be greater than 200
feet (60 960 mm) measured along the line of travel in
nonsprinklered buildings. Travel distance shall not be more
than 250 feet (76 200 mm) in sprinklered buildings. Where
aisles are provided for seating, the distance shall be measured
along the aisles and aisle accessway without travel over or on
the seats.
Exceptions:

1. Smoke-protected assembly seating: The travel dis-
tance from each seat to the nearest entrance to a
vomitory or concourse shall not exceed 200 feet (60
960 mm). The travel distance from the entrance to the
vomitory or concourse to a stair, ramp or walk on the
exterior of the building shall not exceed 200 feet (60
960 mm).
2. Open-air seating: The travel distance from each seat
to the building exterior shall not exceed 400 feet (122
m). The travel distance shall not be limited in facilities
of Type I or II construction.
1028.8 Common path of egress travel. The common path of
egress travel shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) from any seat
to a point where an occupant has a choice of two paths of egress
travel to two exits.
Exceptions:
1. For areas serving less than 50 occupants, the common
path of egress travel shall not exceed 75 feet (22 860
mm).

TABLE 1028.6.2
WIDTH OF AISLES FOR SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY

INCHES OF CLEAR WIDTH PER SEAT SERVED

Stairs and aisle steps with
handrails within 30 inches

Stairs and aisle steps
without handrails
within 30 inches

Passageways, doorways
and ramps not steeper
than 1 in 10 in slope

Ramps steeper
than 1 in 10 in slope

0.200

0.130

0.096

0.076

0.060

0.250

0.163

0.120

0.095

0.075

0.150

0.100

0.070

0.056

0.044

0.165

0.110

0.077

0.062

0.048

TOTAL NUMBER OF
SEATS IN THE SMOKE-
PROTECTED ASSEMBLY
OCCUPANCY

Equal to or less than 5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

Equal to or greater than 25,000

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

251

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:51 PM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

2. For smoke-protected assembly seating, the common
path of egress travel shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240
mm).
1028.8.1 Path through adjacent row. Where one of the
two paths of travel is across the aisle through a row of seats
to another aisle, there shall be not more than 24 seats
between the two aisles, and the minimum clear width
between rows for the row between the two aisles shall be 12
inches (305 mm) plus 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for each addi-
tional seat above seven in the row between aisles.
Exception: For smoke-protected assembly seating there
shall not be more than 40 seats between the two aisles
and the minimum clear width shall be 12 inches (305
mm) plus 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) for each additional seat.
1028.9 Assembly aisles are required. Every occupied portion
of any occupancy in Group A or assembly occupancies acces-
sory to Group E that contains seats, tables, displays, similar fix-
tures or equipment shall be provided with aisles leading to exits
or exit access doorways in accordance with this section. Aisle
accessways for tables and seating shall comply with Section
1017.4.
1028.9.1 Minimum aisle width. The minimum clear width
for aisles shall be as shown:
1. Forty-eight inches (1219 mm) for aisle stairs having
seating on each side.
Exception: Thirty-six inches (914 mm) where the
aisle serves less than 50 seats.
2. Thirty-six inches (914 mm) for aisle stairs having
seating on only one side.
3. Twenty-three inches (584 mm) between an aisle stair
handrail or guard and seating where the aisle is sub-
divided by a handrail.
4. Forty-two inches (1067 mm) for level or ramped
aisles having seating on both sides.
Exceptions:
1. Thirty-six inches (914 mm) where the aisle
serves less that 50 seats.
2. Thirty inches (762 mm) where the aisle does
not serve more than 14 seats.
5. Thirty-six inches (914 mm) for level or ramped aisles
having seating on only one side.
Exceptions:
1. Thirty inches (762 mm) where the aisle does
not serve more than 14 seats.
2. Twenty-three inches (584 mm) between an
aisle stair handrail and seating where an
aisle does not serve more than five rows on
one side.
1028.9.2 Aisle width. The aisle width shall provide suffi-
cient egress capacity for the number of persons accommo-
dated by the catchment area served by the aisle. The
catchment area served by an aisle is that portion of the total
space that is served by that section of the aisle. In establish-
ing catchment areas, the assumption shall be made that there

is a balanced use of all means of egress, with the number of
persons in proportion to egress capacity.
1028.9.3 Converging aisles. Where aisles converge to form
a single path of egress travel, the required egress capacity of
that path shall not be less than the combined required capac-
ity of the converging aisles.
1028.9.4 Uniform width. Those portions of aisles, where
egress is possible in either of two directions, shall be uni-
form in required width.
1028.9.5 Assembly aisle termination. Each end of an aisle
shall terminate at cross aisle, foyer, doorway, vomitory or
concourse having access to an exit.
Exceptions:
1. Dead-end aisles shall not be greater than 20 feet
(6096 mm) in length.
2. Dead-end aisles longer than 20 feet (6096 mm) are
permitted where seats beyond the 20-foot (6096
mm) dead-end aisle are no more than 24 seats from
another aisle, measured along a row of seats hav-
ing a minimum clear width of 12 inches (305 mm)
plus 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for each additional seat
above seven in the row.
3. Fo r smo k e -p ro t e c t ed a s s emb l y s ea t ing , th e
dead-end aisle length of vertical aisles shall not
exceed a distance of 21 rows.
4. For smoke-protected assembly seating, a longer
dead-end aisle is permitted where seats beyond the
21-row dead-end aisle are not more than 40 seats
from another aisle, measured along a row of seats
having an aisle accessway with a minimum clear
width of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 0.3 inch (7.6
mm) for each additional seat above seven in the
row.
1028.9.6 Assembly aisle obstructions. There shall be no
obstructions in the required width of aisles except for hand-
rails as provided in Section 1028.13.
1028.10 Clear width of aisle accessways serving seating.
Where seating rows have 14 or fewer seats, the minimum clear
aisle accessway width shall not be less than 12 inches (305
mm) measured as the clear horizontal distance from the back of
the row ahead and the nearest projection of the row behind.
Where chairs have automatic or self-rising seats, the measure-
ment shall be made with seats in the raised position. Where any
chair in the row does not have an automatic or self-rising seat,
the measurements shall be made with the seat in the down posi-
tion. For seats with folding tablet arms, row spacing shall be
determined with the tablet arm in the used position.
Exception: For seats with folding tablet arms, row spacing
is permitted to be determined with the tablet arm in the
stored position where the tablet arm when raised manually
to vertical position in one motion automatically returns to
the stored position by force of gravity.
1028.10.1 Dual access. For rows of seating served by aisles
or doorways at both ends, there shall not be more than 100
seats per row. The minimum clear width of 12 inches (305
mm) between rows shall be increased by 0.3 inch (7.6 mm)

252

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:51 PM

36

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

for every additional seat beyond 14 seats, but the minimum
clear width is not required to exceed 22 inches (559 mm).
Exception: For smoke-protected assembly seating, the
row length limits for a 12-inch-wide (305 mm) aisle
accessway, beyond which the aisle accessway minimum
clear width shall be increased, are in Table 1028.10.1.

TABLE 1028.10.1
SMOKE-PROTECTED
ASSEMBLY AISLE ACCESSWAYS

TOTAL NUMBER OF
SEATS IN THE SMOKE-
PROTECTED ASSEMBLY
OCCUPANCY

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SEATS PER ROW
PERMITTED TO HAVE A MINIMUM 12-INCH
CLEAR WIDTH AISLE ACCESSWAY

Aisle or doorway at
both ends of row

Aisle or doorway at
one end of row only

Less than 4,000
4,000
7,000
10,000
13,000
16,000
19,000
22,000 and greater

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

7
7
8
8
9
9
10
11

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1028.10.2 Single access. For rows of seating served by an
aisle or doorway at only one end of the row, the minimum
clear width of 12 inches (305 mm) between rows shall be
increased by 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for every additional seat
beyond seven seats, but the minimum clear width is not
required to exceed 22 inches (559 mm).
Exception: For smoke-protected assembly seating, the
row length limits for a 12-inch-wide (305 mm) aisle
accessway, beyond which the aisle accessway minimum
clear width shall be increased, are in Table 1028.10.1.
1028.11 Assembly aisle walking surfaces. Aisles with a slope
not exceeding one unit vertical in eight units horizontal
(12.5-percent slope) shall consist of a ramp having a slip-resis-
tant walking surface. Aisles with a slope exceeding one unit
vertical in eight units horizontal (12.5-percent slope) shall con-
sist of a series of risers and treads that extends across the full
width of aisles and complies with Sections 1028.11.1 through
1028.11.3.
1028.11.1 Treads. Tread depths shall be a minimum of 11
inches (279 mm) and shall have dimensional uniformity.
Exception: The tolerance between adjacent treads shall
not exceed 0.188 inch (4.8 mm).
1028.11.2 Risers. Where the gradient of aisle stairs is to be
the same as the gradient of adjoining seating areas, the riser
height shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) nor more
than 8 inches (203 mm) and shall be uniform within each
flight.

Exceptions:
1. Riser height nonuniformity shall be limited to the
extent necessitated by changes in the gradient of
the adjoining seating area to maintain adequate

MEANS OF EGRESS

sightlines. Where nonuniformities exceed 0.188
inch (4.8 mm) between adjacent risers, the exact
location of such nonuniformities shall be indicated
with a distinctive marking stripe on each tread at
the nosing or leading edge adjacent to the nonuni-
form risers. Such stripe shall be a minimum of 1
inch (25 mm), and a maximum of 2 inches (51
mm), wide. The edge marking stripe shall be dis-
tinctively different from the contrasting marking
stripe.
2. Riser heights not exceeding 9 inches (229 mm)
shall be permitted where they are necessitated by
the slope of the adjacent seating areas to maintain
sightlines.
1028.11.3 Tread contrasting marking stripe. A contrast-
ing marking stripe shall be provided on each tread at the nos-
ing or leading edge such that the location of each tread is
readily apparent when viewed in descent. Such stripe shall
be a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm), and a maximum of 2
inches (51 mm), wide.

Exception: The contrasting marking stripe is permitted
to be omitted where tread surfaces are such that the loca-
tion of each tread is readily apparent when viewed in
descent.

1028.12 Seat stability. In places of assembly, the seats shall be
securely fastened to the floor.

Exceptions:

1. In places of assembly or portions thereof without
ramped or tiered floors for seating and with 200 or
fewer seats, the seats shall not be required to be fas-
tened to the floor.
2. In places of assembly or portions thereof with seating
at tables and without ramped or tiered floors for seat-
ing, the seats shall not be required to be fastened to the
floor.
3. In places of assembly or portions thereof without
ramped or tiered floors for seating and with greater
than 200 seats, the seats shall be fastened together in
groups of not less than three or the seats shall be
securely fastened to the floor.
4. In places of assembly where flexibility of the seating
arrangement is an integral part of the design and func-
tion of the space and seating is on tiered levels, a max-
imum of 200 seats shall not be required to be fastened
to the floor. Plans showing seating, tiers and aisles
shall be submitted for approval.
5. Groups of seats within a place of assembly separated
from other seating by railings, guards, partial height
walls or similar barriers with level floors and having
no more than 14 seats per group shall not be required
to be fastened to the floor.
6. Seats intended for musicians or other performers and
separated by railings, guards, partial height walls or
similar barriers shall not be required to be fastened to
the floor.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

253

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:52 PM

37

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

1028.13 Handrails. Ramped aisles having a slope exceeding
one unit vertical in 15 units horizontal (6.7-percent slope) and
aisle stairs shall be provided with handrails located either at
the side or within the aisle width.
Exceptions:
1. Handrails are not required for ramped aisles having a
gradient no greater than one unit vertical in eight units
horizontal (12.5-percent slope) and seating on both
sides.
2. Handrails are not required if, at the side of the aisle,
there is a guard that complies with the graspability
requirements of handrails.
3. Handrail extensions are not required at the top and
bottom of aisle stairs and aisle ramp runs to permit
crossovers within the aisles.
1028.13.1 Discontinuous handrails. Where there is seat-
ing on both sides of the aisle, the handrails shall be discon-
tinuous with gaps or breaks at intervals not exceeding five
rows to facilitate access to seating and to permit crossing
from one side of the aisle to the other. These gaps or breaks
shall have a clear width of at least 22 inches (559 mm) and
not greater than 36 inches (914 mm), measured horizon-
tally, and the handrail shall have rounded terminations or
bends.
1028.13.2 Intermediate handrails. Where handrails are
provided in the middle of aisle stairs, there shall be an addi-
tional intermediate handrail located approximately 12 inches
(305 mm) below the main handrail.
1028.14 Assembly guards. Assembly guards shall comply
with Sections 1028.14.1 through 1028.14.3.
1028.14.1 Cross aisles. Cross aisles located more than 30
inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have
guards in accordance with Section 1013.
Where an elevation change of 30 inches (762 mm) or less
occurs between a cross aisle and the adjacent floor or grade
below, guards not less than 26 inches (660 mm) above the
aisle floor shall be provided.
Exception: Where the backs of seats on the front of the
cross aisle project 24 inches (610 mm) or more above the
adjacent floor of the aisle, a guard need not be provided.
1028.14.2 Sightline-constrained guard heights. Unless
subject to the requirements of Section 1028.14.3, a fascia or
railing system in accordance with the guard requirements of
Section 1013 and having a minimum height of 26 inches
(660 mm) shall be provided where the floor or footboard
elevation is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or
grade below and the fascia or railing would otherwise inter-
fere with the sightlines of immediately adjacent seating. At
bleachers, a guard must be provided where required by ICC
300.
1028.14.3 Guards at the end of aisles. A fascia or railing
system complying with the guard requirements of Section
1013 shall be provided for the full width of the aisle where
the foot of the aisle is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
the floor or grade below. The fascia or railing shall be a min-
imum of 36 inches (914 mm) high and shall provide a mini-

mum 42 inches (1067 mm) measured diagonally between
the top of the rail and the nosing of the nearest tread.
1028.15 Bench seating. Where bench seating is used, the num-
ber of persons shall be based on one person for each 18 inches
(457 mm) of length of the bench.

SECTION 1029
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE

1029.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by
this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape
and rescue in Group R and I-1 occupancies. Basements and
sleeping rooms below the fourth story above grade plane shall
have at least one exterior emergency escape and rescue open-
ing in accordance with this section. Where basements contain
one or more sleeping rooms, emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be required in each sleeping room, but shall not
be required in adjoining areas of the basement. Such openings
shall open directly into a public way or to a yard or court that
opens to a public way.
Exceptions:
1. In other than Group R-3 occupancies, buildings
equipped throughout with an approved automatic
s p r i n k l e r s y s t em i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
2. In other than Group R-3 occupancies, sleeping rooms
provided with a door to a fire-resistance-rated corri-
dor having access to two remote exits in opposite
directions.
3. The emergency escape and rescue opening is permit-
ted to open onto a balcony within an atrium in accor-
dance with the requirements of Section 404, provided
the balcony provides access to an exit and the dwell-
ing unit or sleeping unit has a means of egress that is
not open to the atrium.
4. Basements with a ceiling height of less than 80 inches
(2032 mm) shall not be required to have emergency
escape and rescue windows.
5. High-rise buildings in accordance with Section 403.
6. Emergency escape and rescue openings are not
required from basements or sleeping rooms that have
an exit door or exit access door that opens directly into
a public way or to a yard, court or exterior exit bal-
cony that opens to a public way.
7. Basements without habitable spaces and having no
more than 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in floor area shall
not be required to have emergency escape windows.
1029.2 Minimum size. Emergency escape and rescue open-
ings shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5.7 square feet
(0.53 m2).
Exception: The minimum net clear opening for emergency
escape and rescue grade-floor openings shall be 5 square
feet (0.46 m2).
1029.2.1 Minimum dimensions. The minimum net clear
opening height dimension shall be 24 inches (610 mm). The

254

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:52 PM

38

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MEANS OF EGRESS

minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be 20
inches (508 mm). The net clear opening dimensions shall be
the result of normal operation of the opening.
1029.3 Maximum height from floor. Emergency escape and
rescue openings shall have the bottom of the clear opening not
greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) measured from the floor.
1029.4 Operational constraints. Emergency escape and res-
cue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room
without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar
devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and
rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size
complies with Section 1029.2 and such devices shall be
releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a
key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the escape and rescue opening. Where such bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are installed in existing build-
ings, smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Sec-
tion 907.2.11 regardless of the valuation of the alteration.
1029.5 Window wells. An emergency escape and rescue open-
ing with a finished sill height below the adjacent ground level
shall be provided with a window well in accordance with Sec-
tions 1029.5.1 and 1029.5.2.
1029.5.1 Minimum size. The minimum horizontal area of
the window well shall be 9 square feet (0.84 m2), with a min-
imum dimension of 36 inches (914 mm). The area of the
window well shall allow the emergency escape and rescue
opening to be fully opened.
1029.5.2 Ladders or steps. Window wells with a vertical
depth of more than 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be equipped
with an approved permanently affixed ladder or steps. Lad-
ders or rungs shall have an inside width of at least 12 inches
(305 mm), shall project at least 3 inches (76 mm) from the
wall and shall be spaced not more than 18 inches (457 mm)
on center (o.c.) vertically for the full height of the window
well. The ladder or steps shall not encroach into the required
dimensions of the window well by more than 6 inches (152
mm). The ladder or steps shall not be obstructed by the
emergency escape and rescue opening. Ladders or steps
required by this section are exempt from the stairway
requirements of Section 1009.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

255

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:52 PM

39

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

256

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

10_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:8)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, February 18, 2009 3:29:52 PM

40

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 11

ACCESSIBILITY

SECTION 1101
GENERAL

1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
design and construction of facilities for accessibility to physi-
cally disabled persons.
1101.2 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and
constructed to be accessible in accordance with this code and
ICC A117.1.

SECTION 1102
DEFINITIONS

1102.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in the code,
have the meanings shown herein:
ACCESSIBLE. A site, building, facility or portion thereof that
complies with this chapter.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE. A continuous, unobstructed path
that complies with this chapter.
ACCESSIBLE UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit that
complies with this code and the provisions for Accessible units
in ICC A117.1.
CIRCULATION PATH. An exterior or interior way of pas-
sage from one place to another for pedestrians.
COMMON USE. Interior or exterior circulation paths,
rooms, spaces or elements that are not for public use and are
made available for the shared use of two or more people.
DETECTABLE WARNING. A standardized surface feature
built in or applied to walking surfaces or other elements to warn
visually impaired persons of hazards on a circulation path.
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, MULTI-
STORY. See definition for “Multistory unit.”
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE A. See
definition for “Type A unit.”
DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE B. See
definition for “Type B unit.”
EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. All or any portion of a space
used only by employees and only for work. Corridors, toilet
rooms, kitchenettes and break rooms are not employee work
areas.
FACILITY. All or any portion of buildings, structures, site
improvements, elements and pedestrian or vehicular routes
located on a site.
INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE. This
refers to a dwelling unit or sleeping unit that can or will be used
all or part of the time as the occupant’s place of abode.
MULTILEVEL ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating that is
arranged in distinct levels where each level is comprised of

either multiple rows, or a single row of box seats accessed from
a separate level.
MULTISTORY UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit with
habitable space located on more than one story.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE. An entrance that is not a service
entrance or a restricted entrance.
PUBLIC-USE AREAS. Interior or exterior rooms or spaces
that are made available to the general public.
RESTRICTED ENTRANCE. An entrance that is made
available for common use on a controlled basis, but not public
use, and that is not a service entrance.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property
designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individ-
ual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and
removing personal property on a self-service basis.
SERVICE ENTRANCE. An entrance intended primarily for
delivery of goods or services.
SITE. A parcel of land bounded by a lot line or a designated
portion of a public right-of-way.
TYPE A UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and
constructed for accessibility in accordance with this code and
the provisions for Type A units in ICC A117.1.
TYPE B UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and
constructed for accessibility in accordance with this code and
the provisions for Type B units in ICC A117.1, consistent with
the design and construction requirements of the federal Fair
Housing Act.
WHEELCHAIR SPACE. A space for a single wheelchair and
its occupant.

SECTION 1103
SCOPING REQUIREMENTS

1103.1 Where required. Sites, buildings, structures, facilities,
elements and spaces, temporary or permanent, shall be accessi-
ble to persons with physical disabilities.
1103.2 General exceptions. Sites, buildings, structures, facili-
ties, elements and spaces shall be exempt from this chapter to
the extent specified in this section.
1103.2.1 Specific requirements. Accessibility is not
required in buildings and facilities, or portions thereof, to
the extent permitted by Sections 1104 through 1110.
1103.2.2 Existing buildings. Existing buildings shall com-
ply with Section 3411.
1103.2.3 Employee work areas. Spaces and elements
within employee work areas shall only be required to com-
ply with Sections 907.5.2.3.2, 1007 and 1104.3.1 and shall
be designed and constructed so that individuals with disabil-
ities can approach, enter and exit the work area. Work areas,

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

257

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:51 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

or portions of work areas, other than raised courtroom sta-
tions, that are less than 300 square feet (30 m2) in area and
elevated 7 inches (178 mm) or more above the ground or fin-
ish floor where the elevation is essential to the function of
the space shall be exempt from all requirements.
1103.2.4 Detached dwellings. Detached one- and two-fam-
ily dwellings and accessory structures, and their associated
sites and facilities, are not required to be accessible.
1103.2.5 Utility buildings. Occupancies in Group U are
exempt from the requirements of this chapter other than the
following:
1. In agricultural buildings, access is required to paved
work areas and areas open to the general public.
2. Private garages or carports that contain required
accessible parking.

1103.2.6 Construction sites. Structures, sites and equip-
ment directly associated with the actual processes of con-
struction including, but not limited to, scaffolding, bridging,
materials hoists, materials storage or construction trailers
are not required to be accessible.
1103.2.7 Raised areas. Raised areas used primarily for pur-
poses of security, life safety or fire safety including, but not
limited to, observation galleries, prison guard towers, fire
towers or lifeguard stands, are not required to be accessible
or to be served by an accessible route.
1103.2.8 Limited access spaces. Nonoccupiable spaces
accessed only by ladders, catwalks, crawl spaces, freight
elevators or very narrow passageways are not required to be
accessible.

1103.2.9 Equipment spaces. Spaces frequented only by
personnel for maintenance, repair or monitoring of equip-
ment are not required to be accessible. Such spaces include,
but are not limited to, elevator pits, elevator penthouses,
mechanical, electrical or communications equipment
rooms, piping or equipment catwalks, water or sewage treat-
ment pump rooms and stations, electric substations and
transformer vaults, and highway and tunnel utility facilities.
1103.2.10 Single-occupant structures. Single-occupant
structures accessed only by passageways below grade or
elevated above grade including, but not limited to, toll
booths that are accessed only by underground tunnels, are
not required to be accessible.
1103.2.11 Residential Group R-1. Buildings of Group R-1
containing not more than five sleeping units for rent or hire
that are also occupied as the residence of the proprietor are
not required to be accessible.
1103.2.12 Day care facilities. Where a day care facility
(Groups A-3, E, I-4 and R-3) is part of a dwelling unit, only
the portion of the structure utilized for the day care facility is
required to be accessible.
1103.2.13 Live/work units. In live/work units constructed
in accordance with Section 419, the portion of the unit uti-
lized for nonresidential use is required to be accessible. The
residential portion of the live/work unit is required to be
evaluated separately in accordance with Sections 1107.6.2
and 1107.7.

258

1103.2.14 Detention and correctional facilities. In deten-
tion and correctional facilities, common use areas that are
used only by inmates or detainees and security personnel,
and that do not serve holding cells or housing cells required
to be accessible, are not required to be accessible or to be
served by an accessible route.

1103.2.15 Walk-in coolers and freezers. Walk-in coolers
and freezers intended for employee use only are not
required to be accessible.

➡

SECTION 1104
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

1104.1 Site arrival points. Accessible routes within the site
shall be provided from public transportation stops; accessible
parking; accessible passenger loading zones; and public streets
or sidewalks to the accessible building entrance served.
Exception: Other than in buildings or facilities containing
or serving Type B units, an accessible route shall not be
required between site arrival points and the building or facil-
ity entrance if the only means of access between them is a
vehicular way not providing for pedestrian access.
1104.2 Within a site. At least one accessible route shall con-
nect accessible buildings, accessible facilities, accessible ele-
ments and accessible spaces that are on the same site.
Exception: An accessible route is not required between
accessible buildings, accessible facilities, accessible ele-
ments and accessible spaces that have, as the only means of
access between them, a vehicular way not providing for
pedestrian access.
1104.3 Connected spaces. When a building or portion of a
building is required to be accessible, an accessible route shall
be provided to each portion of the building, to accessible build-
ing entrances connecting accessible pedestrian walkways and
the public way.
Exceptions:
1. In assembly areas with fixed seating, an accessible
route shall not be required to serve levels where
wheelchair spaces are not provided.
2. In Group I-2 facilities, doors to sleeping units shall be
exempted from the requirements for maneuvering
clearance at the room side provided the door is a mini-
mum of 44 inches (1118 mm) in width.
1104.3.1 Employee work areas. Common use circulation

paths within employee work areas shall be accessible
routes.

Exceptions:

1. Common use circulation paths, located within
employee work areas that are less than 300 square
feet (27.9 m2) in size and defined by permanently
installed partitions, counters, casework or furnish-
ings, shall not be required to be accessible routes.
2. Common use circulation paths, located within
employee work areas, that are an integral compo-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:53 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

nent of equipment, shall not be required to be
accessible routes.
3. Common use circulation paths, located within
ex ter ior emp loyee work areas that are fu lly
exposed to the weather, shall not be required to be
accessible routes.
1104.3.2 Press boxes. Press boxes in assembly areas shall
be on an accessible route.

Exceptions:
1. An accessible route shall not be required to press
boxes in bleachers that have points of entry at only
one level, provided that the aggregate area of all
press boxes is 500 square feet (46 m2) maximum.
2. An accessible route shall not be required to
free-standing press boxes that are elevated above
grade 12 feet (3660 mm) minimum provided that
the aggregate area of all press boxes is 500 square
feet (46 m2) maximum.
1104.4 Multilevel buildings and facilities. At least one acces-
sible route shall connect each accessible level, including mez-
zanines, in multilevel buildings and facilities.
Exceptions:
1. An accessible route is not required to stories and mez-
zanines that have an aggregate area of not more than
3,000 square feet (278.7 m2) and are located above
and below accessible levels. This exception shall not
apply to:
1.1. Multiple tenant facilities of Group M occu-
pancies containing five or more tenant spaces;
1.2. Levels containing offices of health care pro-
viders (Group B or I); or
1.3. Passenger transportation facilities and air-
ports (Group A-3 or B).
2. Levels that do not contain accessible elements or
other spaces as determined by Section 1107 or 1108
are not required to be served by an accessible route
from an accessible level.
3. In air traffic control towers, an accessible route is not
required to serve the cab and the floor immediately
below the cab.
4. Where a two-story building or facility has one story
with an occupant load of five or fewer persons that
does not contain public use space, that story shall not
be required to be connected by an accessible route to
the story above or below.
5. Vertical access to elevated employee work stations
within a courtroom is not required at the time of initial
construction, provided a ramp, lift or elevator com-
plying with ICC A117.1 can be installed without
requiring reconfiguration or extension of the court-
room or extension of the electrical system.
1104.5 Location. Accessible routes shall coincide with or be
located in the same area as a general circulation path. Where
the circulation path is interior, the accessible route shall also be

ACCESSIBILITY

interior. Where only one accessible route is provided, the
accessible route shall not pass through kitchens, storage
rooms, restrooms, closets or similar spaces.
Exceptions:
1. Accessible routes from parking garages contained
within and serving Type B units are not required to be
interior.
2. A single accessible route is permitted to pass through
a kitchen or storage room in an Accessible unit, Type
A unit or Type B unit.
1104.6 Security barriers. Security barriers including, but not
limited to, security bollards and security check points shall not
obstruct a required accessible route or accessible means of
egress.
Exception: Where security barriers incorporate elements
that cannot comply with these requirements, such as certain
metal detectors, fluoroscopes or other similar devices, the
accessible route shall be permitted to be provided adjacent
to security screening devices. The accessible route shall
permit persons with disabilities passing around security
barriers to maintain visual contact with their personal items
to the same extent provided others passing through the secu-
rity barrier.

SECTION 1105
ACCESSIBLE ENTRANCES

1105.1 Public entrances. In addition to accessible entrances
required by Sections 1105.1.1 through 1105.1.6, at least 60
percent of all public entrances shall be accessible.

Exceptions:
1. An accessible entrance is not required to areas not
required to be accessible.
2. Loading and service entrances that are not the only
entrance to a tenant space.
1105.1.1 Parking garage entrances. Where provided,
direct access for pedestrians from parking structures to
buildings or facility entrances shall be accessible.
1105.1.2 Entrances from tunnels or elevated walkways.
Where direct access is provided for pedestrians from a
pedestrian tunnel or elevated walkway to a building or facil-
ity, at least one entrance to the building or facility from each
tunnel or walkway shall be accessible.
1105.1.3 Restricted entrances. Where restricted entrances
are provided to a building or facility, at least one restricted
entrance to the building or facility shall be accessible.
1105.1.4 Entrances for inmates or detainees. Where
entrances used only by inmates or detainees and security
personnel are provided at judicial facilities, detention facili-
ties or correctional facilities, at least one such entrance shall
be accessible.

1105.1.5 Service entrances. If a service entrance is the
only entrance to a building or a tenant space in a facility, that
entrance shall be accessible.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

259

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:53 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

1105.1.6 Tenant spaces, dwelling units and sleeping
units. At least one accessible entrance shall be provided to
each tenant, dwelling unit and sleeping unit in a facility.
Exceptions:
1. An accessible entrance is not required to tenants
that are not required to be accessible.
2. An accessible entrance is not required to dwelling
units and sleeping units that are not required to be
Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units.

SECTION 1106
PARKING AND PASSENGER LOADING FACILITIES

1106.1 Required. Where parking is provided, accessible park-
ing spaces shall be provided in compliance with Table 1106.1,
except as required by Sections 1106.2 through 1106.4. Where
more than one parking facility is provided on a site, the number
of parking spaces required to be accessible shall be calculated
separately for each parking facility.
Exception: This section does not apply to parking spaces
used exclusively for buses, trucks, other delivery vehicles,
law enforcement vehicles or vehicular impound and motor
pools where lots accessed by the public are provided with an
accessible passenger loading zone.

TABLE 1106.1
ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES

TOTAL PARKING
SPACES PROVIDED

REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER
OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES

1 to 25
26 to 50
51 to 75
76 to 100
101 to 150
151 to 200
201 to 300
301 to 400
401 to 500
501 to 1,000

1,001 and over

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2% of total
20, plus one for each 100,
or fraction thereof, over 1,000

1106.2 Groups R-2 and R-3. At least 2 percent, but not less
than one, of each type of parking space provided for occupan-
cies in Groups R-2 and R-3, which are required to have Acces-
sible, Type A or Type B dwelling or sleeping units, shall be
accessible. Where parking is provided within or beneath a
building, accessible parking spaces shall also be provided
within or beneath the building.
1106.3 Hospital outpatient facilities. At least 10 percent, but
not less than one, of patient and visitor parking spaces provided
to serve hospital outpatient facilities shall be accessible.
1106.4 Rehabilitation facilities and outpatient physical
therapy facilities. At least 20 percent, but not less than one, of
the portion of patient and visitor parking spaces serving reha-

bilitation facilities specializing in treating conditions that
affect mobility and outpatient physical therapy facilities shall
be accessible.
1106.5 Van spaces. For every six or fraction of six accessible
parking spaces, at least one shall be a van-accessible parking
space.
Exception: In Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, van-acces-
sible spaces located within private garages shall be permit-
ted to have vehicular routes, entrances, parking spaces and
access aisles with a minimum vertical clearance of 7 feet
(2134 mm).
1106.6 Location. Accessible parking spaces shall be located
on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking
to an accessible building entrance. In parking facilities that do
not serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces shall
be located on the shortest route to an accessible pedestrian
entrance to the parking facility. Where buildings have multiple
accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking
spaces shall be dispersed and located near the accessible
entrances.
Exceptions:
1. In multilevel parking structures, van-accessible park-
ing spaces are permitted on one level.
2. Accessible parking spaces shall be permitted to be
located in different parking facilities if substantially
equivalent or greater accessibility is provided in
terms of distance from an accessible entrance or
entrances, parking fee and user convenience.
1106.7 Passenger loading zones. Passenger loading zones
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ICC
A117.1.
1106.7.1 Continuous loading zones. Where passenger
loading zones are provided, one passenger loading zone in
every continuous 100 linear feet (30.4 m) maximum of load-
ing zone space shall be accessible.
1106.7.2 Medical facilities. A passenger loading zone shall
be provided at an accessible entrance to licensed medical
and long-term care facilities where people receive physical
or medical treatment or care and where the period of stay
exceeds 24 hours.
1106.7.3 Valet parking. A passenger loading zone shall be
provided at valet parking services.
1106.7.4 Mechanical access parking garages. Mechani-
cal access parking garages shall provide at least one passen-
ger loading zone at vehicle drop-off and vehicle pick-up
areas.

SECTION 1107
DWELLING UNITS AND SLEEPING UNITS

1107.1 General. In addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, occupancies having dwelling units or sleeping units
shall be provided with accessible features in accordance with
this section.

260

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:54 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1107.2 Design. Dwelling units and sleeping units that are
required to be Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units
shall comply with the applicable portions of Chapter 10 of ICC
A117.1. Units required to be Type A units are permitted to be
designed and constructed as Accessible units. Units required to
be Type B units are permitted to be designed and constructed as
Accessible units or as Type A units.
1107.3 Accessible spaces. Rooms and spaces available to the
general public or available for use by residents and serving
Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units shall be accessi-
ble. Accessible spaces shall include toilet and bathing rooms,
kitchen, living and dining areas and any exterior spaces,
including patios, terraces and balconies.
Exceptions:
1. Recreational facilities in accordance with Section
1109.14.
2. In Group I-2 facilities, doors to sleeping units shall be
exempted from the requirements for maneuvering
clearance at the room side provided the door is a mini-
mum of 44 inches (1118 mm) in width.
1107.4 Accessible route. At least one accessible route shall
connect accessible building or facility entrances with the pri-
mary entrance of each Accessible unit, Type A unit and Type B
unit within the building or facility and with those exterior and
interior spaces and facilities that serve the units.
Exceptions:
1. If due to circumstances outside the control of the
owner, either the slope of the finished ground level
between accessible facilities and buildings exceeds
one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1:12), or
where physical barriers or legal restrictions prevent
the installation of an accessible route, a vehicular
route with parking that complies with Section 1106 at
each public or common use facility or building is per-
mitted in place of the accessible route.
2. Exterior decks, patios or balconies that are part of
Type B units and have impervious surfaces, and that
are not more than 4 inches (102 mm) below the fin-
ished floor level of the adjacent interior space of the
unit.
1107.5 Group I. Accessible units and Type B units shall be pro-
vided in Group I occupancies in accordance with Sections
1107.5.1 through 1107.5.5.
1107.5.1 Group I-1. Accessible units and Type B units shall
be provided in Group I-1 occupancies in accordance with
Sections 1107.5.1.1 and 1107.5.1.2.
1107.5.1.1 Accessible units. At least 4 percent, but not

less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units
shall be Accessible units.
1107.5.1.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more
dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied

ACCESSIBILITY

as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit
intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B
unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted
to be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.
1107.5.2 Group I-2 nursing homes. Accessible units and
Type B units shall be provided in nursing homes of Group
I-2 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1107.5.2.1 and
1107.5.2.2.
1107.5.2.1 Accessible units. At least 50 percent but not
less than one of each type of the dwelling units and sleep-
ing units shall be Accessible units.
1107.5.2.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more
dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied
as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit
intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B
unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted
to be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.
1107.5.3 Group I-2 hospitals. Accessible units and Type B
units shall be provided in general-purpose hospitals, psychi-
atric facilities, detoxification facilities and residential
care/assisted living facilities of Group I-2 occupancies in
accordance with Sections 1107.5.3.1 and 1107.5.3.2.
1107.5.3.1 Accessible units. At least 10 percent, but not

less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units
shall be Accessible units.
1107.5.3.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more
dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied
as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit
intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B
unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted
to be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.
1107.5.4 Group I-2 rehabilitation facilities. In hospitals
and rehabilitation facilities of Group I-2 occupancies which
specialize in treating conditions that affect mobility, or units
within either which specialize in treating conditions that
affect mobility, 100 percent of the dwelling units and sleep-
ing units shall be Accessible units.
1107.5.5 Group I-3. Accessible units shall be provided in
Group I-3 occupancies in accordance with Sections
1107.5.5.1 through 1107.5.5.3.
1107.5.5.1 Group I-3 sleeping units. In Group I-3 occu-
pancies, at least 2 percent, but not less than one, of the
dwelling units and sleeping units shall be Accessible
units.

1107.5.5.2 Special holding cells and special housing
cells or rooms. In addition to the Accessible units required
by Section 1107.5.5.1, where special holding cells or spe-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

261

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:54 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

cial housing cells or rooms are provided, at least one
serving each purpose shall be an Accessible unit. Cells or
rooms subject to this requirement include, but are not lim-
ited to, those used for purposes of orientation, protective
custody, administrative or disciplinary detention or segre-
gation, detoxification and medical isolation.
Exception: Cells or rooms specially designed with-
out protrusions and that are used solely for purposes
of suicide prevention shall not be required to include
grab bars.
1107.5.5.3 Medical care facilities. Patient sleeping
units or cells required to be Accessible units in medical
care facilities shall be provided in addition to any medi-
cal isolation cells required to comply with Section
1107.5.5.2.
1107.6 Group R. Accessible units, Type A units and Type B
units shall be provided in Group R occupancies in accordance
with Sections 1107.6.1 through 1107.6.4.
1107.6.1 Group R-1. Accessible units and Type B units
shall be provided in Group R-1 occupancies in accordance
with Sections 1107.6.1.1 and 1107.6.1.2.
1107.6.1.1 Accessible units. In Group R-1 occupancies,

Accessible dwelling units and sleeping units shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Table 1107.6.1.1. All R-1 units
on a site shall be considered to determine the total num-
ber of Accessible units. Accessible units shall be dis-
persed among the various classes of units. Roll-in
showers provided in Accessible units shall include a per-
manently mounted folding shower seat.
1107.6.1.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more
dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied
as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit
intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B
unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted
to be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.

1107.6.2 Group R-2. Accessible units, Type A units and
Type B units shall be provided in Group R-2 occupancies in
accordance with Sections 1107.6.2.1 and 1107.6.2.2.

1107.6.2.1 Apartment houses, monasteries and con-
vents. Type A units and Type B units shall be provided in
apartment houses, monasteries and convents in accor-
dance with Sections 1107.6.2.1.1 and 1107.6.2.1.2.

1107.6.2.1.1 Type A units. In Group R-2 occupan-
cies containing more than 20 dwelling units or sleep-
ing units, at least 2 percent but not less than one of the
units shall be a Type A unit. All R-2 units on a site shall
be considered to determine the total number of units
and the required number of Type A units. Type A units
shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

Exceptions:

1. The number of Type A units is permitted to
be reduced in accordance with Section
1107.7.
2. Existing structures on a site shall not con-
tribute to the total number of units on a site.

1107.6.2.1.2 Type B units. Where there are four or

more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be
occupied as a residence in a single structure, every
dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occu-
pied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permit-
ted to be reduced in accordance with Section
1107.7.

1107.6.2.2 Group R-2 other than apartment houses,
monasteries and convents. In Group R-2 occupancies,
other than apartment houses, monasteries and convents,
Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in
accordance with Sections 1107.6.2.2.1 and 1107.6.2.2.2.

TABLE 1107.6.1.1
ACCESSIBLE DWELLING AND SLEEPING UNITS

TOTAL NUMBER OF
UNITS PROVIDED

MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF
ACCESSIBLE UNITS WITHOUT
ROLL-IN SHOWERS

MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF
ACCESSIBLE UNITS WITH
ROLL-IN SHOWERS

TOTAL NUMBER OF
REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE UNITS

1 to 25
26 to 50
51 to 75
76 to 100
101 to 150
151 to 200
201 to 300
301 to 400
401 to 500
501 to 1,000

Over 1,000

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2% of total
20, plus 1 for each 100, or
fraction thereof, over 1,000

0
0
1
1
2
2
3
4
4
1% of total
10 plus 1 for each 100, or
fraction thereof, over 1,000

1
2
4
5
7
8
10
12
13
3% of total
30 plus 2 for each 100, or
fraction thereof, over 1,000

262

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:55 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1107.6.2.2.1 Accessible units. Accessible dwelling
units and sleeping units shall be provided in accor-
dance with Table 1107.6.1.1.
1107.6.2.2.2 Type B units. Where there are four or

more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be
occupied as a residence in a single structure, every
dwelling unit and every sleeping unit intended to be
occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permit-
ted to be reduced in accordance with Section
1107.7.
1107.6.3 Group R-3. In Group R-3 occupancies where
there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units
intended to be occupied as a residence in a single structure,
every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occu-
pied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to
be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.
1107.6.4 Group R-4. Accessible units and Type B units
shall be provided in Group R-4 occupancies in accordance
with Sections 1107.6.4.1 and 1107.6.4.2.
1107.6.4.1 Accessible units. At least one of the dwelling

or sleeping units shall be an Accessible unit.
1107.6.4.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more
dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied
as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit
intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B
unit.
Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted
to be reduced in accordance with Section 1107.7.
1107.7 General exceptions. Where specifically permitted by
Section 1107.5 or 1107.6, the required number of Type A units
and Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with
Sections 1107.7.1 through 1107.7.5.
1107.7.1 Structures without elevator service. Where no
elevator service is provided in a structure, only the dwelling
units and sleeping units that are located on stories indicated
in Sections 1107.7.1.1 and 1107.7.1.2 are required to be
Type A units and Type B units, respectively. The number of
Type A units shall be determined in accordance with Section
1107.6.2.1.1.
1107.7.1.1 One story with Type B units required. At

least one story containing dwelling units or sleeping
units intended to be occupied as a residence shall be pro-
vided with an accessible entrance from the exterior of the
structure and all units intended to be occupied as a resi-
dence on that story shall be Type B units.

1107.7.1.2 Additional stories with Type B units. On all
other stories that have a building entrance in proximity to
arrival points intended to serve units on that story, as
indicated in Items 1 and 2, all dwelling units and sleeping
units intended to be occupied as a residence served by
that entrance on that story shall be Type B units.
1. Where the slopes of the undisturbed site measured
between the planned entrance and all vehicular or

ACCESSIBILITY

pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet (15 240
mm) of the planned entrance are 10 percent or less,
and
2. Where the slopes of the planned finished grade
measured between the entrance and all vehicular
or pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet (15 240
mm) of the planned entrance are 10 percent or less.
Where no such arrival points are within 50 feet (15 240
mm) of the entrance, the closest arrival point shall be
used unless that arrival point serves the story required by
Section 1107.7.1.1.
1107.7.2 Multistory units. A multistory dwelling or sleep-
ing unit which is not provided with elevator service is not
required to be a Type B unit. Where a multistory unit is pro-
vided with external elevator service to only one floor, the
floor provided with elevator service shall be the primary
entry to the unit, shall comply with the requirements for a
Type B unit and a toilet facility shall be provided on that
floor.
1107.7.3 Elevator service to the lowest story with units.
Where elevator service in the building provides an accessi-
ble route only to the lowest story containing dwelling or
sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, only
the units on that story which are intended to be occupied as a
residence are required to be Type B units.

1107.7.4 Site impracticality. On a site with multiple
nonelevator buildings, the number of units required by Sec-
tion 1107.7.1 to be Type B units is permitted to be reduced to
a percentage which is equal to the percentage of the entire
site having grades, prior to development, which are less than
10 percent, provided that all of the following conditions are
met:
1. Not less than 20 percent of the units required by Sec-
tion 1107.7.1 on the site are Type B units;
2. Units required by Section 1107.7.1, where the slope
between the building entrance serving the units on
that story and a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point is
no greater than 8.33 percent, are Type B units;
3. Units required by Section 1107.7.1, where an ele-
va ted wa lkway is p lanned be tween a bu i ld ing
entrance serving the units on that story and a pedes-
trian or vehicular arrival point and the slope between
them is 10 percent or less are Type B units; and
4. Units served by an elevator in accordance with Sec-
tion 1107.7.3 are Type B units.
1107.7.5 Design flood elevation. The required number of
Type A units and Type B units shall not apply to a site where
the required elevation of the lowest floor or the lowest hori-
zontal structural building members of nonelevator buildings
are at or above the design flood elevation resulting in:
1. A difference in elevation between the minimum
required floor elevation at the primary entrances and
vehicular and pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet
(15 240 mm) exceeding 30 inches (762 mm), and
2. A slope exceeding 10 percent between the minimum
required floor elevation at the primary entrances and

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

263

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:55 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

vehicular and pedestrian arrival points within 50 feet
(15.24 m).
Where no such arrival points are within 50 feet (15.24 m)
of the primary entrances, the closest arrival points shall be
used.

SECTION 1108
SPECIAL OCCUPANCIES

1108.1 General. In addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, the requirements of Sections 1108.2 through 1108.4
shall apply to specific occupancies.
1108.2 Assembly area seating. Assembly areas with fixed
seating shall comply with Sections 1108.2.1 through 1108.2.8.
Dining areas shall comply with Section 1108.2.9. In addition,
lawn seating shall comply with Section 1108.2.6.
1108.2.1 Services. If a service or facility is provided in an
area that is not accessible, the same service or facility shall
be provided on an accessible level and shall be accessible.
1108.2.2 Wheelchair spaces. In theaters, bleachers, grand-
stands, stadiums, arenas and other fixed seating assembly
areas, accessible wheelchair spaces complying with ICC
A117.1 shall be provided in accordance with Sections
1108.2.2.1 through 1108.2.2.4.
1108.2.2.1 General seating. Wheelchair spaces shall be
provided in accordance with Table 1108.2.2.1.
1108.2.2.2 Luxury boxes, club boxes and suites. In
each luxury box, club box, and suite within arenas, stadi-
ums and grandstands, wheelchair spaces shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Table 1108.2.2.1.
1108.2.2.3 Other boxes. In boxes other than those
required to comply with Section 1108.2.2.2, the total
number of wheelchair spaces provided shall be deter-
mined in accordance with Table 1108.2.2.1. Wheelchair
spaces shall be located in not less than 20 percent of all
boxes provided.

TABLE 1108.2.2.1
ACCESSIBLE WHEELCHAIR SPACES

CAPACITY OF SEATING
IN ASSEMBLY AREAS

MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF
WHEELCHAIR SPACES

4 to 25
26 to 50
51 to 100
101 to 300
301 to 500

501 to 5,000

5,001 and over

1
2
4
5
6
6, plus 1 for each 150, or fraction
thereof, between 501 through 5,000
36 plus 1 for each 200, or fraction
thereof, over 5,000

1108.2.2.4 Team or player seating. At least one wheel-
chair space shall be provided in team or player seating
areas serving areas of sport activity.
Exception: Wheelchair spaces shall not be required
in team or player seating areas serving bowling lanes

264

that are not required to be located on an accessible
route in accordance with Section 1109.14.4.1.
1108.2.3 Companion seats. At least one companion seat
complying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided for each
wheelchair space required by Sections 1108.2.2.1 through
1108.2.2.3.

1108.2.4 Dispersion of wheelchair spaces in multilevel

assembly seating areas. In multilevel assembly seating
areas, wheelchair spaces shall be provided on the main floor
level and on one of each two additional floor or mezzanine
levels. Wheelchair spaces shall be provided in each luxury
box, club box and suite within assembly facilities.

Exceptions:
1. In multilevel assembly spaces utilized for worship
services where the second floor or mezzanine level
contains 25 percent or less of the total seating
capacity, wheelchair spaces shall be permitted to
all be located on the main level.
2. In multilevel assembly seating where the second
floor or mezzanine level provides 25 percent or
less of the total seating capacity and 300 or fewer
seats, all wheelchair spaces shall be permitted to
be located on the main level.
3. Wheelchair spaces in team or player seating serv-
ing areas of sport activity are not required to be dis-
persed.
1108.2.5 Designated aisle seats. At least 5 percent, but not
less than one, of the total number of aisle seats provided
shall be designated aisle seats and shall be the aisle seats
located closest to accessible routes.
Exception: Designated aisle seats are not required in
team or player seating serving areas of sport activity.
1108.2.6 Lawn seating. Lawn seating areas and exterior
overflow seating areas, where fixed seats are not provided,
shall connect to an accessible route.
1108.2.7 Assistive listening systems. Each assembly area
where audible communications are integral to the use of the
space shall have an assistive listening system.
Exception: Other than in courtrooms, an assistive listen-
ing system is not required where there is no audio ampli-
fication system.
1108.2.7.1 Receivers. Receivers shall be provided for
assistive listening systems in accordance with Table
1108.2.7.1.

Exceptions:
1. Where a building contains more than one
assembly area, the total number of required
receivers shall be permitted to be calculated
according to the total number of seats in the
assembly areas in the building, provided that all
receivers are usable with all systems and if
assembly areas required to provide assistive lis-
tening are under one management.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:56 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

2. Where all seats in an assembly area are served
by an induction loop assistive listening system,
the minimum number of receivers required by
Table 1108.2.7.1 to be hearing-aid compatible
shall not be required.
1108.2.7.2 Public address systems. Where stadiums,
a r e n a s a n d g ra n d s t a n d s p r ov i d e a u d i b l e p u b l i c
announcements, they shall also provide equivalent text
information regarding events and facilities in compli-
ance with Sections 1108.2.7.2.1 and 1108.2.7.2.2.
1108.2.7.2.1 Prerecorded text messages. Where
electronic signs are provided and have the capability to
display prerecorded text messages containing informa-
tion that is the same, or substantially equivalent to
information that is provided audibly, signs shall dis-
play text that is equivalent to audible announcements.
Exception: Announcements that cannot be prere-
corded in advance of the event shall not be required
to be displayed.
1108.2.7.2.2 Real-time messages. Where electronic
signs are provided and have the capability to display
real-time messages containing information that is the
same, or substantially equivalent, to information that
is provided audibly, signs shall display text that is
equivalent to audible announcements.
1108.2.8 Performance areas. An accessible route shall
directly connect the performance area to the assembly seat-
ing area where a circulation path directly connects a perfor-
mance area to an assembly seating area. An accessible route
shall be provided from performance areas to ancillary areas
or facilities used by performers.
1108.2.9 Dining areas. In dining areas, the total floor area
allotted for seating and tables shall be accessible.
Exceptions:
1. In buildings or facilities not required to provide an
accessible route between levels, an accessible
route to a mezzanine seating area is not required,
provided that the mezzanine contains less than 25
percent of the total area and the same services are
provided in the accessible area.

2. In sports facilities, tiered dining areas providing
seating required to be accessible shall be required
to have accessible routes serving at least 25 per-
cent of the dining area, provided that accessible
routes serve accessible seating and where each tier
is provided with the same services.
1108.2.9.1 Dining surfaces. Where dining surfaces for
the consumption of food or drink are provided, at least 5
percent, but not less than one, of the dining surfaces for
the seating and standing spaces shall be accessible and
be distributed throughout the facility and located on a
level accessed by an accessible route.
1108.3 Self-service storage facilities. Self-service storage
facilities shall provide accessible individual self-storage
spaces in accordance with Table 1108.3.

TABLE 1108.3
ACCESSIBLE SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES

TOTAL SPACES IN
FACILITY

MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE
SPACES

1 to 200

5%, but not less than 1

Over 200

10, plus 2% of total number of units over 200

1108.3.1 Dispersion. Accessible individual self-service
storage spaces shall be dispersed throughout the various
classes of spaces provided. Where more classes of spaces
are provided than the number of required accessible spaces,
the number of accessible spaces shall not be required to
exceed that required by Table 1108.3. Accessible spaces are
permitted to be dispersed in a single building of a
multibuilding facility.
1108.4 Judicial facilities. Judicial facilities shall comply with
Sections 1108.4.1 through 1108.4.3.
1108.4.1 Courtrooms. Each courtroom shall be accessible
and comply with Sections 1108.4.1.1 through 1108.4.1.5.
1108.4.1.1 Jury box. A wheelchair space complying
with ICC A117.1 shall be provided within the jury box.
Exception: Adjacent compan ion seat ing is not
required.

TABLE 1108.2.7.1
RECEIVERS FOR ASSISTIVE LISTENING SYSTEMS

CAPACITY OF SEATING
IN ASSEMBLY AREAS

MINIMUM REQUIRED
NUMBER OF RECEIVERS

MINIMUM NUMBER OF RECEIVERS
TO BE HEARING-AID COMPATIBLE

50 or less

51 to 200

201 to 500

501 to 1,000

1,001 to 2,000

Over 2,000

Note: * = or fraction thereof

2

2, plus 1 per 25 seats over 50 seats*

2, plus 1 per 25 seats over 50 seats*

20, plus 1 per 33 seats over 500 seats*

35, plus 1 per 50 seats over 1,000 seats*

55, plus 1 per 100 seats over 2,000 seats*

2

2

1 per 4 receivers*

1 per 4 receivers*

1 per 4 receivers*

1 per 4 receivers*

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

265

11_ibc_2009pg265.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:19:27 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

1108.4.1.2 Gallery seating. Wheelchair spaces comply-
ing with ICC A117.1 shall be provided in accordance
with Table 1108.2.2.1. Designated aisle seats shall be
provided in accordance with Section 1108.2.5.

1108.4.1.3 Assistive listening systems. An assistive lis-
tening system must be provided. Receivers shall be pro-
vided for the assistive listening system in accordance
with Section 1108.2.7.1.

1108 .4 .1 .4 Employee work stations . The judge’s
bench, clerk’s station, bailiff ’s station, deputy clerk’s sta-
tion and court reporter’s station shall be located on an
acce s s ib le rou te. The ve r t ica l access to e leva ted
employee work stations within a courtroom is not
required at the time of initial construction, provided a
ramp, lift or elevator complying with ICC A117.1 can be
installed without requiring reconfiguration or extension
of the courtroom or extension of the electrical system.

1108.4.1.5 Other work stations. The litigant’s and
counsel stations, including the lectern, shall be accessi-
ble in accordance with ICC A117.1.

1108.4.2 Holding cells. Central holding cells and
court-floor holding cells shall comply with Sections
1108.4.2.1 and 1108.4.2.2.

1108.4.2.1 Central holding cells. Where separate cen-
tral holding cells are provided for adult males, juvenile
males, adult females or juvenile females, one of each
type shall be accessible. Where central holding cells are
provided and are not separated by age or sex, at least one
accessible cell shall be provided.

1108.4.2.2 Court-floor holding cells. Where separate
court-floor holding cells are provided for adult males,
juvenile males, adult females or juvenile females, each
courtroom shall be served by one accessible cell of each
type. Where court-floor holding cells are provided and
are not separated by age or sex, courtrooms shall be
served by at least one accessible cell. Accessible cells
shall be permitted to serve more than one courtroom.

1108.4.3 Visiting areas. Visiting areas shall comply with
Sections 1108.4.3.1 and 1108.4.3.2.

1108.4.3.1 Cubicles and counters. At least 5 percent
but no fewer than one of the cubicles shall be accessible
on both the visitor and detainee sides. Where counters
are provided, at least one shall be accessible on both the
visitor and detainee sides.

Exception: This requirement shall not apply to the
detainee side of cubicles or counters at noncontact
visiting areas not serving accessible holding cells.

1108.4.3.2 Partitions. Where solid partitions or security
glazing separate visitors from detainees, at least one of
each type of cubicle or counter partition shall be accessi-
ble.

SECTION 1109
OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES

1109.1 General. Accessible building features and facilities
shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1109.2 through
1109.14.
Exception: Type A units and Type B units shall comply with
ICC A117.1.
1109.2 Toilet and bathing facilities. Each toilet room and
bathing room shall be accessible. Where a floor level is not
required to be connected by an accessible route, the only toilet
rooms or bathing rooms provided within the facility shall not
be located on the inaccessible floor. At least one of each type of
fixture, element, control or dispenser in each accessible toilet
room and bathing room shall be accessible.
Exceptions:
1. In toilet rooms or bathing rooms accessed only
through a private office, not for common or public use
and intended for use by a single occupant, any of the
following alternatives are allowed:
1.1. Doors are permitted to swing into the clear
floor space, provided the door swing can be
reversed to meet the requirements in ICC
A117.1;
1.2. The height requirements for the water closet
in ICC A117.1 are not applicable;
1.3. Grab bars are not required to be installed in a
toilet room, provided that reinforcement has
been installed in the walls and located so as to
permit the installation of such grab bars; and
1.4. The requirement for height, knee and toe
clearance shall not apply to a lavatory.
2. This section is not applicable to toilet and bathing
rooms that serve dwelling units or sleeping units that
are not required to be accessible by Section 1107.
3. Where multiple single-user toilet rooms or bathing
rooms are clustered at a single location, at least 50
percent but not less than one room for each use at each
cluster shall be accessible.
4. Where no more than one urinal is provided in a toilet
room or bathing room, the urinal is not required to be
accessible.
5. Toilet rooms that are part of critical care or intensive
care patient sleeping rooms are not required to be
accessible.

1109.2.1 Family or assisted-use toilet and bathing
rooms. In assembly and mercantile occupancies, an acces-
sible family or assisted-use toilet room shall be provided
where an aggregate of six or more male and female water
closets is required. In buildings of mixed occupancy, only
those water closets required for the assembly or mercantile
occupancy shall be used to determine the family or
assisted-use toilet room requirement. In recreational facili-

266

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:57 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ties where separate-sex bathing rooms are provided, an
accessible family or assisted-use bathing room shall be pro-
vided. Fixtures located within family or assisted-use toilet
and bathing rooms shall be included in determining the
number of fixtures provided in an occupancy.
Exception: Where each separate-sex bathing room has
on ly one showe r o r ba th tub fix tu re , a fam i ly o r
assisted-use bathing room is not required.
1109.2.1.1 Standard. Family or assisted-use toilet and
bathing rooms shall comply with Sections 1109.2.1.2
through 1109.2.1.7 and ICC A117.1.
1109.2.1.2 Family or assisted-use toilet rooms. Family
or assisted-use toilet rooms shall include only one water
closet and only one lavatory. A family or assisted-use
bathing room in accordance with Section 1109.2.1.3
shall be considered a family or assisted-use toilet room.
Exception: A urinal is permitted to be provided in
addition to the water closet in a family or assisted-use
toilet room.
1109.2.1.3 Family or assisted-use bathing rooms.
Family or assisted-use bathing rooms shall include only
one shower or bathtub fixture. Family or assisted-use
bathing rooms shall also include one water closet and
one lavatory. Where storage facilities are provided for
separate-sex bathing rooms, accessible storage facilities
shall be provided for family or assisted-use bathing
rooms.
1109.2.1.4 Location. Family or assisted-use toilet and
bathing rooms shall be located on an accessible route.
Family or assisted-use toilet rooms shall be located not
more than one story above or below separate-sex toilet
rooms. The accessible route from any separate-sex toilet
room to a family or assisted-use toilet room shall not
exceed 500 feet (152 m).
1109.2.1.5 Prohibited location. In passenger transpor-
tation facilities and airports, the accessible route from
separate-sex toilet rooms to a family or assisted-use toilet
room shall not pass through security checkpoints.
1109.2.1.6 Clear floor space. Where doors swing into a
family or assisted-use toilet or bathing room, a clear floor
space not less than 30 inches by 48 inches (762 mm by
1219 mm) shall be provided, within the room, beyond
the area of the door swing.
1109.2.1.7 Privacy. Doors to family or assisted-use toi-
let and bathing rooms shall be securable from within the
room.
1109.2.2 Water closet compartment. Where water closet
compartments are provided in a toilet room or bathing
room, at least one wheelchair-accessible compartment shall
be provided. Where the combined total water closet com-
partments and urinals provided in a toilet room or bathing
room is six or more, at least one ambulatory-accessible
water closet compartment shall be provided in addition to
the
wheelchair-accessible
compartment. Wheel-
chair-accessible and ambulatory-accessible compartments
shall comply with ICC A117.1.

ACCESSIBILITY

1109.2.3 Lavatories. Where lavatories are provided, at
least 5 percent, but not less than one, shall be accessible.
Where the total lavatories provided in a toilet room or bath-
ing facility is six or more, at least one lavatory with
enhanced reach ranges in accordance with ICC A117.1,
shall be provided.
1109.3 Sinks. Where sinks are provided, at least 5 percent but
not less than one provided in accessible spaces shall comply
with ICC A117.1.
Exception: Mop or service sinks are not required to be
accessible.

1109.4 Kitchens and kitchenettes. Where kitchens and kitch-
enettes are provided in accessible spaces or rooms, they shall
be accessible in accordance with ICC A117.1.
1109.5 Drinking fountains. Where drinking fountains are
provided on an exterior site, on a floor or within a secured area,
the drinking fountains shall be provided in accordance with
Sections 1109.5.1 and 1109.5.2.
1109.5.1 Minimum number. No fewer than two drinking
fountains shall be provided. One drinking fountain shall
comply with the requirements for people who use a wheel-
chair and one drinking fountain shall comply with the
requirements for standing persons.
Exception: A single drinking fountain that complies
with the requirements for people who use a wheelchair
and standing persons shall be permitted to be substituted
for two separate drinking fountains.
1109.5.2 More than the minimum number. Where more
than the minimum number of drinking fountains specified
in Section 1109.5.1 are provided, 50 percent of the total
number of drinking fountains provided shall comply with
the requirements for persons who use a wheelchair and 50
percent of the total number of drinking fountains provided
shall comply with the requirements for standing persons.
Exception: Where 50 percent of the drinking fountains
yields a fraction, 50 percent shall be permitted to be
rounded up or down, provided that the total number of
drinking fountains complying with this section equals
100 percent of the drinking fountains.
1109.6 Elevators. Passenger elevators on an accessible route
shall be accessible and comply with Section 3001.3.
1109.7 Lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts are permitted to be a
part of a required accessible route in new construction where
indicated in Items 1 through 10. Platform (wheelchair) lifts
shall be installed in accordance with ASME A18.1.
1. An accessible route to a performing area and speaker
platforms in Group A occupancies.
2. An accessible route to wheelchair spaces required to
comply with the wheelchair space dispersion require-
ments of Sections 1108.2.2 through 1108.2. 6.
3. An accessible route to spaces that are not open to the
general public with an occupant load of not more than
five.
4. An accessible route within a dwelling or sleeping unit.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

267

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:57 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

5. An accessible route to wheelchair seating spaces
located in outdoor dining terraces in Group A-5 occu-
pancies where the means of egress from the dining ter-
races to a public way are open to the outdoors.
6. An accessible route to jury boxes and witness stands;
raised courtroom stations including judges’ benches,
clerks’ stations, bailiffs’ stations, deputy clerks’ sta-
tions and court reporters’ stations; and to depressed
areas such as the well of the court.
7. An accessible route to load and unload areas serving
amusement rides.
8. An accessible route to play components or soft con-
tained play structures.
9. An accessible route to team or player seating areas
serving areas of sport activity.
10. An accessible route where existing exterior site con-
straints make use of a ramp or elevator infeasible.
1109.8 Storage. Where fixed or built-in storage elements such
as cabinets, shelves, medicine cabinets, closets and drawers are
provided in required accessible spaces, at least one of each type
shall contain storage space complying with ICC A117.1.
1109.8.1 Lockers. Where lockers are provided in accessi-
ble spaces, at least five percent, but not less than one, of each
type shall be accessible.
1109.8.2 Shelving and display units. Self-service shelves
and display units shall be located on an accessible route.
Such shelving and display units shall not be required to
comply with reach-range provisions.
1109.8.3 Coat hooks and shelves. Where coat hooks and
shelves are provided in toilet rooms or toilet compartments
or in dressing, fitting or locker rooms, at least one of each
type shall be accessible and shall be provided in accessible
toilet rooms without toilet compartments, accessible toilet
compartments and accessible dressing, fitting and locker
rooms.
1109.9 Detectable warnings. Passenger transit platform edges
bordering a drop-off and not protected by platform screens or
guards shall have a detectable warning.
Exception: Detectable warnings are not required at bus
stops.
1109.10 Seating at tables, counters and work surfaces.
Where seating or standing space at fixed or built-in tables,
counters or work surfaces is provided in accessible spaces, at
least 5 percent of the seating and standing spaces, but not less
than one, shall be accessible. In Group I-3 occupancy visiting
areas at least 5 percent, but not less than one, cubicle or counter
shall be accessible on both the visitor and detainee sides.
Exceptions:
1. Check-wr i t ing surfaces a t check-ou t a is les no t
required to comply with Section 1109.11.2 are not
required to be accessible.
2. In Group I-3 occupancies, the counter or cubicle on
the detainee side is not required to be accessible at
noncontact visiting areas or in areas not serving
accessible holding cells or sleeping units.

➡

1109.10.1 Dispersion. Accessible fixed or built-in seating
at tables, counters or work surfaces shall be distributed
throughout the space or facility containing such elements
and located on a level accessed by an accessible route.
1109.11 Service facilities. Service facilities shall provide for
accessible features in accordance with Sections 1109.11.1
through 1109.11.5.
1109.11.1 Dressing, fitting and locker rooms. Where
dressing rooms, fitting rooms or locker rooms are provided,
at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of each type of use in
each cluster provided shall be accessible.
1109.11.2 Check-out aisles. Where check-out aisles are
provided, accessible check-out aisles shall be provided in
accordance with Table 1109.11.2. Where check-out aisles
serve different functions, at least one accessible check-out
aisle shall be provided for each function. Where check-out
aisles serve different functions, accessible check-out aisles
shall be provided in accordance with Table 1109.11.2 for
each function. Where check-out aisles are dispersed
throughout the building or facility, accessible check-out
aisles shall also be dispersed. Traffic control devices, secu-
rity devices and turnstiles located in accessible check-out
aisles or lanes shall be accessible.

TABLE 1109.11.2
ACCESSIBLE CHECK-OUT AISLES

TOTAL CHECK-OUT AISLES OF
EACH FUNCTION

MINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE
CHECK-OUT AISLES OF EACH
FUNCTION

1 to 4

5 to 8

9 to 15

Over 15

1

2

3

3, plus 20% of additional aisles

1109.11.3 Point of sale and service counters. Where coun-
ters are provided for sales or distribution of goods or ser-
vices, at least one of each type provided shall be accessible.
Where such counters are dispersed throughout the building
or facility, accessible counters shall also be dispersed.
1109.11.4 Food service lines. Food service lines shall be
accessible. Where self-service shelves are provided, at least
50 percent, but not less than one, of each type provided shall
be accessible.

1109.11.5 Queue and waiting lines. Queue and waiting
lines servicing accessible counters or check-out aisles shall
be accessible.

1109.12 Controls, operating mechanisms and hardware.
Controls, operating mechanisms and hardware intended for
operation by the occupant, including switches that control
lighting and ventilation and electrical convenience outlets, in
accessible spaces, along accessible routes or as parts of acces-
sible elements shall be accessible.
Exceptions:
1. Operable parts that are intended for use only by ser-
vice or maintenance personnel shall not be required to
be accessible.

268

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:57 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. Electrical or communication receptacles serving a
dedicated use shall not be required to be accessible.
3. Where two or more outlets are provided in a kitchen
above a length of counter top that is uninterrupted by a
sink or appliance, one outlet shall not be required to
be accessible.
4. Floor electrical receptacles shall not be required to be
accessible.
5. HVAC diffusers shall not be required to be accessible.
6. Except for light switches, where redundant controls
are provided for a single element, one control in each
space shall not be required to be accessible.
7. Access doors or gates in barrier walls and fences pro-
tecting pools, spas and hot tubs shall be permitted to
have operab le par ts of the re lease of la tch on
self-latching devices at 54 inches (1370 mm) maxi-
mum and 48 inches minimum above the finished floor
or ground, provided the self-latching devices are not
also self-locking devices, operated by means of a key,
electronic opener, or integral combination lock.
1109.12.1 Operable window. Where operable windows are
provided in rooms that are required to be accessible in accor-
dance with Sections 1107.5.1.1, 1107.5.2.1, 1107.5.3.1,
1107.5.4, 1107.6.1.1, 1107.6.2.1.1, 1107.6.2.2.1 and
1107.7.6.4.1, at least one window in each room shall be
accessible and each required operable window shall be
accessible.

Exception: Accessible windows are not required in bath-
rooms and kitchens.

1109.13 Fuel-dispensing systems. Fuel-dispensing systems
shall comply with ICC A117.1.

1109.14 Recreational and sports facilities. Recreational and
sports facilities shall be provided with accessible features in
accordance with Sections 1109.14.1 through 1109.14.4.

1109.14.1 Facilities serving a single building. In Group
R-2 and R-3 occupancies where recreational facilities are
provided serving a single building containing Type A units
or Type B units, 25 percent, but not less than one, of each
type of recreational facility shall be accessible. Every recre-
ational facility of each type on a site shall be considered to
determine the total number of each type that is required to be
accessible.

1109.14.2 Facilities serving multiple buildings. In Group
R-2 and R-3 occupancies on a single site where multiple
buildings containing Type A units or Type B units are served
by recreational facilities, 25 percent, but not less than one,
of each type of recreational facility serving each building
shall be accessible. The total number of each type of recre-
ational facility that is required to be accessible shall be
determined by considering every recreational facility of
each type serving each building on the site.

1109.14.3 Other occupancies. All recreational and sports
facilities not
falling within the purview of Section
1109.14.1 or 1109.14.2 shall be accessible.

ACCESSIBILITY

1109.14.4 Recreational and sports facilities exceptions.
Recreational and sports facilities required to be accessible
shall be exempt from this chapter to the extent specified in
this section.
1109.14.4.1 Bowling lanes. An accessible route shall be
provided to at least 5 percent, but no less than one, of
each type of bowling lane.
1109.14.4.2 Court sports. In court sports, at least one
accessible route shall directly connect both sides of the
court.
1109.14.4.3 Raised boxing or wrestling rings. Raised
boxing or wrestling rings are not required to be accessi-
ble.

1109.14.4.4 Raised refereeing, judging and scoring
areas. Raised structures used solely for refereeing, judg-
ing or scoring a sport are not required to be accessible.
1109.14.4.5 Raised diving boards and diving plat-
forms. Raised diving boards and diving platforms are
not required to be accessible.

SECTION 1110
SIGNAGE

1110.1 Signs. Required accessible elements shall be identified
by the International Symbol of Accessibility at the following
locations:
1. Accessible parking spaces required by Section 1106.1
except where the total number of parking spaces pro-
vided is four or less.
2. Accessible passenger loading zones.
3. Accessible rooms where multiple single-user toilet or
bathing rooms are clustered at a single location.
4. Accessible entrances where not all entrances are accessi-
ble.
5. Accessible check-out aisles where not all aisles are
accessible. The sign, where provided, shall be above the
check-out aisle in the same location as the check-out
aisle number or type of check-out identification.
6. Unisex toilet and bathing rooms.
7. Accessible dressing, fitting and locker rooms where not
all such rooms are accessible.
8. Accessible areas of refuge in accordance with Section
1007.9.
9. Exterior areas for assisted rescue in accordance with
Section 1007.9.
1110.2 Directional signage. Directional signage indicating
the route to the nearest like accessible element shall be pro-
vided at the following locations. These directional signs shall
include the International Symbol of Accessibility:
1. Inaccessible building entrances.
2. Inaccessible public toilets and bathing facilities.
3. Elevators not serving an accessible route.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

269

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:58 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ACCESSIBILITY

4. At each separate-sex toilet and bathing room indicating
the location of the nearest family or assisted-use toilet or
bathing room where provided in accordance with Sec-
tion 1109.2.1.
5. At exits and exit stairways serving a required accessible
space, but not providing an approved accessible means
of egress, signage shall be provided in accordance with
Section 1007.10.
1110.3 Other signs. Signage indicating special accessibility
provisions shall be provided as shown:
1. Each assembly area required to comply with Section
1108.2.7 shall provide a sign notifying patrons of the
availability of assistive listening systems.
Exception: Where ticket offices or windows are pro-
vided, signs are not required at each assembly area
provided that signs are displayed at each ticket office
or window informing patrons of the availability of
assistive listening systems.
2. At each door to an area of refuge, an exterior area for
assisted rescue, an egress stairway, exit passageway and
exit discharge, signage shall be provided in accordance
with Section 1011.3.
3. At areas of refuge, signage shall be provided in accor-
dance with Section 1007.11.
4. At exterior areas for assisted rescue, signage shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 1007.11.
5. At two-way communication systems, signage shall be
provided in accordance with Section 1007.8.2.
6. Within exit enclosures, signage shall be provided in
accordance with Section 1022.8.

270

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

11_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:9)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:08:58 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 12

INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT

SECTION 1201
GENERAL

1201.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern ven-
tilation, temperature control, lighting, yards and courts, sound
transmission, room dimensions, surrounding materials and
rodent proofing associated with the interior spaces of build-
ings.

SECTION 1202
DEFINITIONS

1202.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
SUNROOM. A one-story structure attached to a building with
a glazing area in excess of 40 percent of the gross area of the
structure’s exterior walls and roof.
THERMAL ISOLATION. A separation of conditioned
spaces, between a sunroom addition and a dwelling unit, con-
sisting of existing or new wall(s), doors and/or windows.

SECTION 1203
VENTILATION

1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ven-
tilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ven-
tilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code.
1203.2 Attic spaces. Enclosed attics and enclosed rafter
spaces formed where ceilings are applied directly to the under-
side of roof framing members shall have cross ventilation for
each separate space by ventilating openings protected against
the entrance of rain and snow. Blocking and bridging shall be
arranged so as not to interfere with the movement of air. A min-
imum of 1 inch (25 mm) of airspace shall be provided between
the insulation and the roof sheathing. The net free ventilating
area shall not be less than 1/300 of the area of the space venti-
lated, with 50 percent of the required ventilating area provided
by ventilators located in the upper portion of the space to be
ventilated at least 3 feet (914 mm) above eave or cornice vents
with the balance of the required ventilation provided by eave or
cornice vents.
1203.2.1 Openings into attic. Exterior openings into the
attic space of any building intended for human occupancy
shall be protected to prevent the entry of birds, squirrels,
rodents, snakes and other similar creatures. Openings for
ventilation having a least dimension of 1/16 inch (1.6 mm)
minimum and 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) maximum shall be permit-
ted. Openings for ventilation having a least dimension
larger than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) shall be provided with corro-
sion-resistant wire cloth screening, hardware cloth, perfo-
rated vinyl or similar material with openings having a least
dimension of 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) minimum and 1/4 inch (6.4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

mm) maximum. Where combustion air is obtained from an
attic area, it shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 of the
International Mechanical Code.

1203.3 Under-floor ventilation. The space between the bot-
tom of the floor joists and the earth under any building except
spaces occupied by basements or cellars shall be provided with
ventilation openings through foundation walls or exterior
walls. Such openings shall be placed so as to provide cross ven-
tilation of the under-floor space.

1203.3.1 Openings for under-floor ventilation. The mini-
mum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than 1
square foot for each 150 square feet (0.67 m2 for each 100
m2) of crawl-space area. Ventilation openings shall be cov-
ered for their height and width with any of the following
materials, provided that the least dimension of the covering
shall not exceed 1/4 inch (6 mm):
1. Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch
(1.8 mm) thick.
2. Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch
(1.2 mm) thick.
3. Cast-iron grilles or gratings.
4. Extruded load-bearing vents.
5. Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or
heavier.
6. Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimen-
sion not exceeding 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).
1203.3.2 Exceptions. The following are exceptions to Sec-
tions 1203.3 and 1203.3.1:
1. Where warranted by climatic conditions, ventilation
openings to the outdoors are not required if ventila-
tion openings to the interior are provided.
2. The total area of ventilation openings is permitted to
be reduced to 1/1,500 of the under-floor area where the
ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor
retarder material and the required openings are placed
so as to provide cross ventilation of the space. The
installation of operable louvers shall not be prohib-
ited.
3. Ventilation openings are not required where continu-
ously operated mechanical ventilation is provided at a
rate of 1.0 cubic foot per minute (cfm) for each 50
square feet (1.02 L/s for each 10 m2) of crawl space
floor area and the ground surface is covered with a
Class I vapor retarder.
4. Ventilation openings are not required when the
ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor
retarder, the perimeter walls are insulated and the
space is conditioned in accordance with the Interna-
tional Energy Conservation Code.

271

12_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:10)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:10:28 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT

5. For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in
Section 1612.3, the openings for under-floor ventila-
tion shall be deemed as meeting the flood opening
requirements of ASCE 24 provided that the ventila-
tion openings are designed and installed in accor-
dance with ASCE 24.
1203.4 Natural ventilation. Natural ventilation of an occu-
pied space shall be through windows, doors, louvers or other
openings to the outdoors. The operating mechanism for such
openings shall be provided with ready access so that the open-
ings are readily controllable by the building occupants.

1203.4.1 Ventilation area required. The minimum
openable area to the outdoors shall be 4 percent of the floor
area being ventilated.

1203.4.1.1 Adjoining spaces. Where rooms and spaces
without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through
an adjoining room, the opening to the adjoining room
shall be unobstructed and shall have an area of not less
than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or
space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.3 m2). The mini-
mum openable area to the outdoors shall be based on the
total floor area being ventilated.

Exception: Exterior openings required for ventila-
tion shall be permitted to open into a thermally iso-
lated sunroom addition or patio cover provided that
the openable area between the sunroom addition or
patio cover and the interior room shall have an area of
not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 20 square feet (1.86
m2). The minimum openable area to the outdoors
shall be based on the total floor area being ventilated.

1203.4.1.2 Openings below grade. Where openings
below grade provide required natural ventilation, the
outside horizontal clear space measured perpendicular to
the opening shall be one and one-half times the depth of
the opening. The depth of the opening shall be measured
from the average adjoining ground level to the bottom of
the opening.

1203.4.2 Contaminants exhausted. Contaminant sources
in naturally ventilated spaces shall be removed in accor-
dance with the International Mechanical Code and the
International Fire Code.

1203.4.2.1 Bathrooms. Rooms containing bathtubs,
showers, spas and similar bathing fixtures shall be
mechanically ventilated in accordance with the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.

1203.4.3 Openings on yards or courts. Where natural ven-
tilation is to be provided by openings onto yards or courts,
such yards or courts shall comply with Section 1206.

1203.5 Other ventilation and exhaust systems. Ventilation
and exhaust systems for occupancies and operations involving
flammable or combustible hazards or other contaminant
sources as covered in the International Mechanical Code or the
International Fire Code shall be provided as required by both
codes.

SECTION 1204
TEMPERATURE CONTROL
1204.1 Equipment and systems. Interior spaces intended for
human occupancy shall be provided with active or passive
space-heating systems capable of maintaining a minimum
indoor temperature of 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm)
above the floor on the design heating day.
Exception: Interior spaces where the primary purpose is
not associated with human comfort.

SECTION 1205
LIGHTING

1205.1 General. Every space intended for human occupancy
shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed
openings in accordance with Section 1205.2 or shall be pro-
vided with artificial light in accordance with Section 1205.3.
Exterior glazed openings shall open directly onto a public way
or onto a yard or court in accordance with Section 1206.
1205.2 Natural light. The minimum net glazed area shall not
be less than 8 percent of the floor area of the room served.
1205.2.1 Adjoining spaces. For the purpose of natural
lighting, any room is permitted to be considered as a portion
of an adjoining room where one-half of the area of the com-
mon wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening
of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior
room or 25 square feet (2.32 m2), whichever is greater.
Exception: Openings required for natural light shall be
permitted to open into a thermally isolated sunroom
addition or patio cover where the common wall provides
a glazed area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of
the interior room or 20 square feet (1.86 m2), whichever
is greater.
1205.2.2 Exterior openings. Exterior openings required by
Section 1205.2 for natural light shall open directly onto a
public way, yard or court, as set forth in Section 1206.
Exceptions:
1. Required exterior openings are permitted to open
into a roofed porch where the porch:
1.1. Abuts a public way, yard or court;
1.2. Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet
(2134 mm); and
1.3. Has a longer side at least 65 percent open
and unobstructed.
2. Skylights are not required to open directly onto a
public way, yard or court.
1205.3 Artificial light. Artificial light shall be provided that is
adequate to provide an average illumination of 10 foot-candles
(107 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762
mm) above the floor level.
1205.4 Stairway illumination. Stairways within dwelling

units and exterior stairways serving a dwelling unit shall have
an illumination level on tread runs of not less than 1 foot-candle
(11 lux). Stairs in other occupancies shall be governed by
Chapter 10.

272

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

12_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:10)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:10:28 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1205.4.1 Controls. The control for activation of the
required stairway lighting shall be in accordance with
NFPA 70.
1205.5 Emergency egress lighting. The means of egress shall
be illuminated in accordance with Section 1006.1.

SECTION 1206
YARDS OR COURTS

1206.1 General. This section shall apply to yards and courts
adjacent to exterior openings that provide natural light or venti-
lation. Such yards and courts shall be on the same property as
the building.
1206.2 Yards. Yards shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) in
width for buildings two stories or less above grade plane. For
buildings more than two stories above grade plane, the mini-
mum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of 1 foot
(305 mm) for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14
stories above grade plane, the required width of the yard shall
be computed on the basis of 14 stories above grade plane.
1206.3 Courts. Courts shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) in
width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall
not be less than 6 feet (1829 mm) in width. Courts shall not be
less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in length unless bounded on one
end by a public way or yard. For buildings more than two sto-
ries above grade plane, the court shall be increased 1 foot (305
mm) in width and 2 feet (610 mm) in length for each additional
story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories above grade plane,
the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of 14
stories above grade plane.
1206.3.1 Court access. Access shall be provided to the bot-
tom of courts for cleaning purposes.
1206.3.2 Air intake. Courts more than two stories in height
shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom
not less than 10 square feet (0.93 m2) in area and leading to
the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public
way.
1206.3.3 Court drainage. The bottom of every court shall
be properly graded and drained to a public sewer or other
approved disposal system complying with the International
Plumbing Code.

SECTION 1207
SOUND TRANSMISSION

1207.1 Scope. This section shall apply to common interior
walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies between adjacent
dwelling units or between dwelling units and adjacent public
areas such as halls, corridors, stairs or service areas.
1207.2 Air-borne sound. Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling
assemblies separating dwelling units from each other or from
public or service areas shall have a sound transmission class
(STC) of not less than 50 (45 if field tested) for air-borne noise
when tested in accordance with ASTM E 90. Penetrations or
openings in construction assemblies for piping; electrical
devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating, venti-
lating or exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or other-

INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT

wise treated to maintain the required ratings. This requirement
shall not apply to dwelling unit entrance doors; however, such
doors shall be tight fitting to the frame and sill.
1207.2.1 Masonry. The sound transmission class of con-
crete masonry and clay masonry assemblies shall be calcu-
lated in accordance with TMS 0302 or determined through
testing in accordance with ASTM 90.
1207.3 Structure-borne sound. Floor/ceiling assemblies
between dwelling units or between a dwelling unit and a public
or service area within the structure shall have an impact insula-
tion class (IIC) rating of not less than 50 (45 if field tested)
when tested in accordance with ASTM E 492.

SECTION 1208
INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS

1208.1 Minimum room widths. Habitable spaces, other than
a kitchen, shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan
dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less
than 3 feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or
counter fronts and walls.
1208.2 Minimum ceiling heights. Occupiable spaces, habit-
able spaces and corridors shall have a ceiling height of not less
than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitch-
ens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall be permitted to
have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).
Exceptions:
1. In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders
spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and
projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the
required ceiling height.
2. If any room in a building has a sloped ceiling, the pre-
scribed ceiling height for the room is required in
one-half the area thereof. Any portion of the room
measuring less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the fin-
ished floor to the ceiling shall not be included in any
computation of the minimum area thereof.
3. Mezzanines constructed in accordance with Section
505.1.
1208.2.1 Furred ceiling. Any room with a furred ceiling
shall be required to have the minimum ceiling height in
two-thirds of the area thereof, but in no case shall the height
of the furred ceiling be less than 7 feet (2134 mm).
1208.3 Room area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one
room that shall have not less than 120 square feet (13.9 m2) of
net floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have a net floor area
of not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2).
Exception: Every kitchen in a one- and two-family dwell-
ing shall have not less than 50 square feet (4.64 m2) of gross
floor area.

1208.4 Efficiency dwelling units. An efficiency living unit
shall conform to the requirements of the code except as modi-
fied herein:
1. The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220
square feet (20.4 m2) of floor area. An additional 100

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

273

12_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:10)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:10:29 AM

3

1210.4 Waterproof joints. Built-in tubs with showers shall
have waterproof joints between the tub and adjacent wall.
1210.5 Toilet rooms. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into a
room used for the preparation of food for service to the public.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT

square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area shall be provided for
each occupant of such unit in excess of two.
2. The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
3. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cook-
ing appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having
a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762
mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this
code shall be provided.
4. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom
containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower.

SECTION 1209
ACCESS TO UNOCCUPIED SPACES

1209.1 Crawl spaces. Crawl spaces shall be provided with a
minimum of one access opening not less than 18 inches by 24
inches (457 mm by 610 mm).
1209.2 Attic spaces. An opening not less than 20 inches by 30
inches (559 mm by 762 mm) shall be provided to any attic area
having a clear height of over 30 inches (762 mm). A 30-inch
(762 mm) minimum clear headroom in the attic space shall be
provided at or above the access opening.
1209.3 Mechanical appliances. Access to mechanical appli-
ances installed in under-floor areas, in attic spaces and on roofs
or elevated structures shall be in accordance with the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.

SECTION 1210
SURROUNDING MATERIALS
1210.1 Floors and wall base finish materials. In other than
dwelling units, toilet, bathing and shower room floor finish
materials shall have a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface. The
intersections of such floors with walls shall have a smooth,
hard, nonabsorbent vertical base that extends upward onto the
walls at least 4 inches (102 mm).
1210.2 Walls and partitions. Walls and partitions within 2 feet
(610 mm) of urinals and water closets shall have a smooth,
hard, nonabsorbent surface, to a height of 4 feet (1219 mm)
above the floor, and except for structural elements, the materi-
als used in such walls shall be of a type that is not adversely
affected by moisture.
Exceptions:

1. Dwelling units and sleeping units.
2. Toilet rooms that are not accessible to the public and
which have not more than one water closet.
Accessories such as grab bars, towel bars, paper dispensers
and soap dishes, provided on or within walls, shall be installed
and sealed to protect structural elements from moisture. For
walls and partitions also see Section 2903.
1210.3 Showers. Shower compartments and walls above bath-
tubs with installed shower heads shall be finished with a
smooth, nonabsorbent surface to a height not less than 70
inches (1778 mm) above the drain inlet.

274

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

12_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:10)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:10:29 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 13

ENERGY EFFICIENCY

SECTION 1301
GENERAL

1301.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design and construc-
tion of buildings for energy efficiency.
1301.1.1 Criteria. Buildings shall be designed and con-
structed in accordance with the International Energy Con-
servation Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

275

13_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:11)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:13:55 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

276

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

13_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:11)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:13:55 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 14

EXTERIOR WALLS

SECTION 1401
GENERAL

1401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall establish the
minimum requirements for exterior walls; exterior wall cover-
ings; exterior wall openings; exterior windows and doors;
architectural trim; balconies and similar projections; and bay
and oriel windows.

SECTION 1402
DEFINITIONS

1402.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
ADHERED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured and sup-
ported through the adhesion of an approved bonding material
applied to an approved backing.
ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured with
approved mechanical fasteners to an approved backing.
BACKING. The wall or surface to which the veneer is secured.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS
(EIFS). EIFS are nonstructural, nonload-bearing, exterior wall
cladding systems that consist of an insulation board attached
either adhesively or mechanically, or both, to the substrate; an
integrally reinforced base coat and a textured protective finish
coat.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS
(EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE. An EIFS that incorporates a
means of drainage applied over a water-resistive barrier.
EXTERIOR WALL. A wall, bearing or nonbearing, that is
used as an enclosing wall for a building, other than a fire wall,
and that has a slope of 60 degrees (1.05 rad) or greater with the
horizontal plane.
EXTERIOR WALL COVERING. A material or assembly of
materials applied on the exterior side of exterior walls for the
purpose of providing a weather-resisting barrier, insulation or
for aesthetics, including but not limited to, veneers, siding,
exterior insulation and finish systems, architectural trim and
embellishments such as cornices, soffits, facias, gutters and
leaders.
EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE. A system or assembly of
exterior wall components, including exterior wall finish mate-
rials, that provides protection of the building structural mem-
b e r s , in c lud ing f r am ing and sh e a th ing m a te r ia l s , and
conditioned interior space, from the detrimental effects of the
exterior environment.
FIBER-CEMENT SIDING. A manufactured, fiber-reinforc-
ing product made with an inorganic hydraulic or calcium sili-
cate binder formed by chemical reaction and reinforced with

discrete organic or inorganic nonasbestos fibers, or both. Addi-
tives that enhance manufacturing or product performance are
permitted. Fiber-cement siding products have either smooth or
textured faces and are intended for exterior wall and related
applications.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM ) . A fac-
tory-manufactured panel consisting of metal skins bonded to
both faces of a plastic core.
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM) SYSTEM.
An exterior wall covering fabricated using MCM in a specific
assembly including joints, seams, attachments, substrate,
framing and other details as appropriate to a particular design.
VENEER. A facing attached to a wall for the purpose of pro-
viding ornamentation, protection or insulation, but not counted
as adding strength to the wall.
VINYL SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from
rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC), that is used as an exterior wall
covering.

WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. A material behind an exte-
rior wall covering that is intended to resist liquid water that has
penetrated behind the exterior covering from further intruding
into the exterior wall assembly.

SECTION 1403
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

1403.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
exterior walls, wall coverings and components thereof.
1403.2 Weather protection. Exterior walls shall provide the
building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The
exterior wall envelope shall include flashing, as described in
Section 1405.4. The exterior wall envelope shall be designed
and constructed in such a manner as to prevent the accumula-
tion of water within the wall assembly by providing a
water-resistive barrier behind the exterior veneer, as described
in Section 1404.2, and a means for draining water that enters
the assembly to the exterior. Protection against condensation in
the exterior wall assembly shall be provided in accordance
with Section 1405.3.
Exceptions:
1. A weather-resistant exterior wall envelope shall not
be required over concrete or masonry walls designed
in accordance with Chapters 19 and 21, respectively.
2. Compliance with the requirements for a means of
drainage, and the requirements of Sections 1404.2
and 1405.4, shall not be required for an exterior wall
envelope that has been demonstrated through testing
to resist wind-driven rain, including joints, penetra-
tions and intersections with dissimilar materials, in

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

277

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:05 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXTERIOR WALLS

accordance with ASTM E 331 under the following
conditions:
2.1. Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall
include at least one opening, one control joint,
one wall/eave interface and one wall sill. All
tested openings and penetrations shall be rep-
resentative of the intended end-use configura-
tion.
2.2. Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall
be at least 4 feet by 8 feet (1219 mm by 2438
mm) in size.
2.3. Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be
tested at a minimum differential pressure of
6.24 pounds per square foot (psf) (0.297
kN/m2).
2.4. Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be
subjected to a minimum test exposure dura-
tion of 2 hours.
The exterior wall envelope design shall be consid-
ered to resist wind-driven rain where the results of
testing indicate that water did not penetrate control
joints in the exterior wall envelope, joints at the per-
imeter of openings or intersections of terminations
with dissimilar materials.
3. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) com-
plying with Section 1408.4.1.
1403.3 Structural. Exterior walls, and the associated open-
ings, shall be designed and constructed to resist safely the
superimposed loads required by Chapter 16.
1403.4 Fire resistance. Exterior walls shall be fire-resistance
rated as required by other sections of this code with opening
protection as required by Chapter 7.
1403.5 Flood resistance. For buildings in flood hazard areas as
established in Section 1612.3, exterior walls extending below
the design flood elevation shall be resistant to water damage.
Wood shall be pressure-preservative treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 for the species, product and end use using a preser-
vative listed in Section 4 of AWPA U1 or decay-resistant heart-
wood of redwood, black locust or cedar.
1403.6 Flood resistance for high-velocity wave action areas.
For buildings in flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity
wave action as established in Section 1612.3, electrical,
mechanical and plumbing system components shall not be
mounted on or penetrate through exterior walls that are
designed to break away under flood loads.

SECTION 1404
MATERIALS

1404.1 General. Materials used for the construction of exterior
walls shall comply with the provisions of this section. Materi-
als not prescribed herein shall be permitted, provided that any
such alternative has been approved.

1404.2 Water-resistive barrier. A minimum of one layer of
No.15 asphalt felt, complying with ASTM D 226 for Type 1
felt or other approved materials, shall be attached to the studs or
sheathing, with flashing as described in Section 1405.4, in such
a manner as to provide a continuous water-resistive barrier
behind the exterior wall veneer.
1404.3 Wood. Exterior walls of wood construction shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 23.
1404.3.1 Basic hardboard. Basic hardboard shall conform
to the requirements of AHA A135.4.
1404.3.2 Hardboard siding. Hardboard siding shall con-
form to the requirements of AHA A135.6 and, where used
structurally, shall be so identified by the label of an
approved agency.
1404.4 Masonry. Exterior walls of masonry construction shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with this section
and Chapter 21. Masonry units, mortar and metal accessories
used in anchored and adhered veneer shall meet the physical
requirements of Chapter 21. The backing of anchored and
adhered veneer shall be of concrete, masonry, steel framing or
wood framing.
1404.5 Metal. Exterior walls of formed steel construction,
structural steel or lightweight metal alloys shall be designed in
accordance with Chapters 22 and 20, respectively.
1404.5.1 Aluminum siding. Aluminum siding shall con-
form to the requirements of AAMA 1402.
1404.5.2 Cold-rolled copper. Copper shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM B 370.
1404.5.3 Lead-coated copper. Lead-coated copper shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM B 101.
1404.6 Concrete. Exterior walls of concrete construction shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 19.
1404.7 Glass-unit masonry. Exterior walls of glass-unit
masonry shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Chapter 21.
1404.8 Plastics. Plastic panel, apron or spandrel walls as
defined in this code shall not be limited in thickness, provided
that such plastics and their assemblies conform to the require-
men ts o f Chap ter 26 and are cons truc ted o f approved
weather-resistant materials of adequate strength to resist the
wind loads for cladding specified in Chapter 16.
1404.9 Vinyl siding. Vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled
as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D 3679 by an
approved quality control agency.
1404.10 Fiber-cement siding. Fiber-cement siding shall con-
form to the requirements of ASTM C 1186, Type A, and shall
be so identified on labeling listing an approved quality control
agency.
1404.11 Exterior insulation and finish systems. Exterior
insulation and finish systems (EIFS) and exterior insulation
and finish systems (EIFS) with drainage shall comply with
Section 1408.

278

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:05 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1405.2
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF WEATHER COVERINGS

COVERING TYPE

MINIMUM THICKNESS
(inches)

Adhered masonry veneer

Aluminum siding

Anchored masonry veneer

Asbestos-cement boards

Asbestos shingles
Cold-rolled copperd
Copper shinglesd

Exterior plywood (with sheathing)

Exterior plywood (without sheathing)

Fiber cement lap siding

Fiber cement panel siding

Fiberboard siding

Glass-fiber reinforced concrete panels
Hardboard sidingc
High-yield copperd
Lead-coated copperd

Lead-coated high-yield copper

Marble slabs

Particleboard (with sheathing)

Particleboard (without sheathing)

Precast stone facing

Steel (approved corrosion resistant)

Stone (cast artificial)

Stone (natural)

Structural glass

Stucco or exterior cement plaster

Three-coat work over:

Metal plaster base

Unit masonry

Cast-in-place or precast concrete

Two-coat work over:

Unit masonry

Cast-in-place or precast concrete

Terra cotta (anchored)

Terra cotta (adhered)

Vinyl siding

Wood shingles
Wood siding (without sheathing)a

0.25

0.019

2.625

0.125

0.156

0.0216 nominal

0.0162 nominal

0.313

See Section 2304.6
0.25c
0.25c

0.5

0.375

0.25

0.0162 nominal

0.0216 nominal

0.0162 nominal

1

See Section 2304.6

See Section 2304.6

0.625

0.0149

1.5

2

0.344

0.875b
0.625b
0.625b

0.5b
0.375b

1

0.25

0.035

0.375

0.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Wood siding of thicknesses less than 0.5 inch shall be placed over sheathing
that conforms to Section 2304.6.
b. Exclusive of texture.
c. As measured at the bottom of decorative grooves.
d. 16 ounces per square foot for cold-rolled copper and lead-coated copper, 12
ounces per square foot for copper shingles , high-yield copper and
lead-coated high-yield copper.

EXTERIOR WALLS

SECTION 1405
INSTALLATION OF WALL COVERINGS

1405.1 General. Exterior wall coverings shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this section.
1405.2 Weather protection. Exterior walls shall provide
weather protection for the building. The materials of the mini-
mum nominal thickness specified in Table 1405.2 shall be
acceptable as approved weather coverings.
1405.3 Vapor retarders. Class I or II vapor retarders shall be
provided on the interior side of frame walls in Zones 5, 6, 7, 8
and Marine 4.
Exceptions:
1. Basement walls.
2. Below-grade portion of any wall.
3. Construction where moisture or its freezing will not
damage the materials.
1405.3.1 Class III vapor retarders. Class III vapor retard-
ers shall be permitted where any one of the conditions in
Table 1405.3.1 is met.

TABLE 1405.3.1
CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS

ZONE

CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS PERMITTED FOR:a

Marine
4

5

6

Vented cladding over OSB
Vented cladding over plywood
Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R2.5 over 2×4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R3.75 over 2×6 wall

Vented cladding over OSB
Vented cladding over plywood
Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R5 over 2×4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R7.5 over 2×6 wall

Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R7.5 over 2×4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R11.25 over 2×6 wall

7 and 8

Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R10 over 2×4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value $ R15 over 2×6 wall

For SI: 1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m3.
a. Spray foam with a minimum density of 2 lbs/ft3 applied to the interior cavity
side of OSB, plywood, fiberboard, insulating sheathing or gypsum is
deemed to meet the insulating sheathing requirement where the spray foam
R-value meets or exceeds the specified insulating sheathing R-value.

1405.3.2 Material vapor retarder class. The vapor
retarder class shall be based on the manufacturer’s certified
testing or a tested assembly.

The following shall be deemed to meet the class speci-
fied:
Class I:

Sheet polyethylene, nonperforated aluminum
foil

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

279

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:05 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXTERIOR WALLS

Class II: Kraft-faced fiberglass batts or paint with a
perm rating greater than 0.1 and less than or
equal to 1.0
Class III: Latex or enamel paint
1405.3.3 Minimum clear airspaces and vented openings
for vented cladding. For the purposes of this section,
vented cladding shall include the following minimum clear
airspaces.
1. Vinyl lap or horizontal aluminum siding applied over
a weather-resistive barrier as specified in this chapter.
2. Brick veneer with a clear airspace as specified in this
code.
3. Other approved vented claddings.
1405.4 Flashing. Flashing shall be installed in such a manner
so as to prevent moisture from entering the wall or to redirect it
to the exterior. Flashing shall be installed at the perimeters of
exterior door and window assemblies, penetrations and termi-
nations of exterior wall assemblies, exterior wall intersections
with roofs, chimneys, porches, decks, balconies and similar
projections and at built-in gutters and similar locations where
moisture could enter the wall. Flashing with projecting flanges
shall be installed on both sides and the ends of copings, under
sills and continuously above projecting trim.

1405.4.1 Exterior wall pockets. In exterior walls of build-
ings or structures, wall pockets or crevices in which mois-
ture can accumulate shall be avoided or protected with caps
or drips, or other approved means shall be provided to pre-
vent water damage.

1405.4.2 Masonry. Flashing and weep holes in anchored
veneer shall be located in the first course of masonry above
finished ground level above the foundation wall or slab, and
other points of support, including structural floors, shelf
angles and lintels where anchored veneers are designed in
accordance with Section 1405.6.

1405.5 Wood veneers. Wood veneers on exterior walls of
buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction shall be not less
than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, 0.438-inch (11.1 mm)
exterior hardboard siding or 0.375-inch (9.5 mm) exterior-type
wood structural panels or particleboard and shall conform to
the following:
1. The veneer shall not exceed 40 feet (1219 mm) in height
above grade. Where fire-retardant-treated wood is used,
the height shall not exceed 60 feet (1829 mm) in height
above grade.
2. T h e v e n e e r i s a t t a c h e d t o o r f u r r e d f r o m a
noncombustible backing that is fire-resistance rated as
required by other provisions of this code.
3. Where open or spaced wood veneers (without concealed
spaces) are used, they shall not project more than 24
inches (610 mm) from the building wall.
1405.6 Anchored masonry veneer. Anchored masonry
veneer shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1405.6,
1405.7, 1405.8 and 1405.9 and Sections 6.1 and 6.2 of TMS
402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.

1405.6.1 Tolerances. Anchored masonry veneers in accor-
dance with Chapter 14 are not required to meet the toler-
ances in Article 3.3 G1 of TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.

1405.6.2 Seismic requirements. Anchored masonry
veneer located in Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F
shall conform to the requirements of Section 6.2.2.10 of
TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5. Anchored masonry veneer
located in Seismic Design Category D shall also conform to
the requirements of Section 6.2.2.10.3.3 of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.

1405.7 Stone veneer. Stone veneer units not exceeding 10
inches (254 mm) in thickness shall be anchored directly to
masonry, concrete or to stud construction by one of the follow-
ing methods:
1. With concrete or masonry backing, anchor ties shall be
not less than 0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant
wire, or approved equal, formed beyond the base of the
backing. The legs of the loops shall be not less than 6
inches (152 mm) in length bent at right angles and laid in
the mortar joint, and spaced so that the eyes or loops are
12 inches (305 mm) maximum on center (o.c.) in both
directions. There shall be provided not less than a
0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant wire tie, or
approved equal, threaded through the exposed loops for
every 2 square feet (0.2 m2) of stone veneer. This tie shall
be a loop having legs not less than 15 inches (381 mm) in
length bent so that it will lie in the stone veneer mortar
joint. The last 2 inches (51 mm) of each wire leg shall
have a right-angle bend. One-inch (25 mm) minimum
thickness of cement grout shall be placed between the
backing and the stone veneer.
2. With stud backing, a 2-inch by 2-inch (51 by 51 mm)
0.0625-inch (1.59 mm) corrosion-resistant wire mesh
with two layers of water-resistive barrier in accordance
with Section 1404.2 shall be applied directly to wood
studs spaced a maximum of 16 inches (406 mm) o.c. On
studs, the mesh shall be attached with 2-inch-long (51
mm) corrosion-resistant steel wire furring nails at 4
inches (102 mm) o.c. providing a minimum 1.125-inch
(29 mm) penetration into each stud and with 8d common
nails at 8 inches (203 mm) o.c. into top and bottom plates
or with equivalent wire ties. There shall be not less than a
0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant wire, or
approved equal, looped through the mesh for every 2
square feet (0.2 m2) of stone veneer. This tie shall be a
loop having legs not less than 15 inches (381 mm) in
length, so bent that it will lie in the stone veneer mortar
joint. The last 2 inches (51 mm) of each wire leg shall
have a right-angle bend. One-inch (25 mm) minimum
thickness of cement grout shall be placed between the
backing and the stone veneer.
1405.8 Slab-type veneer. Slab-type veneer units not exceed-
ing 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness shall be anchored directly to
masonry, concrete or stud construction. For veneer units of
marble, travertine, granite or other stone units of slab form ties
of corrosion-resistant dowels in drilled holes shall be located in
the middle third of the edge of the units, spaced a maximum of
24 inches (610 mm) apart around the periphery of each unit

280

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:06 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

with not less than four ties per veneer unit. Units shall not
exceed 20 square feet (1.9 m2) in area. If the dowels are not tight
fitting, the holes shall be drilled not more than 0.063 inch (1.6
mm) larger in diameter than the dowel, with the hole counter-
sunk to a diameter and depth equal to twice the diameter of the
dowel in order to provide a tight-fitting key of cement mortar at
the dowel locations when the mortar in the joint has set. Veneer
ties shall be corrosion-resistant metal capable of resisting, in
tension or compression, a force equal to two times the weight of
the attached veneer. If made of sheet metal, veneer ties shall be
not smaller in area than 0.0336 by 1 inch (0.853 by 25 mm) or,
if made of wire, not smaller in diameter than 0.1483-inch (3.76
mm) wire.
1405.9 Terra cotta. Anchored terra cotta or ceramic units not
less than 15/8 inches (41 mm) thick shall be anchored directly to
masonry, concrete or stud construction. Tied terra cotta or
ceramic veneer units shall be not less than 15/8 inches (41 mm)
thick with projecting dovetail webs on the back surface spaced
approximately 8 inches (203 mm) o.c. The facing shall be tied
to the backing wall with corrosion-resistant metal anchors of
not less than No. 8 gage wire installed at the top of each piece in
horizontal bed joints not less than 12 inches (305 mm) nor more
than 18 inches (457 mm) o.c.; these anchors shall be secured to
1/4-inch (6.4 mm) corrosion-resistant pencil rods that pass
through the vertical aligned loop anchors in the backing wall.
The veneer ties shall have sufficient strength to support the full
weight of the veneer in tension. The facing shall be set with not
less than a 2-inch (51 mm) space from the backing wall and the
space shall be filled solidly with portland cement grout and pea
gravel. Immediately prior to setting, the backing wall and the
facing shall be drenched with clean water and shall be dis-
tinctly damp when the grout is poured.
1405.10 Adhered masonry veneer. Adhered masonry veneer
shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section
1405 .10 .1 and Sec t ions 6 .1 and 6 .3 o f TMS 402 /ACI
530/ASCE 5.
1405.10.1 Interior adhered masonry veneers. Interior
adhered masonry veneers shall have a maximum weight of
20 psf (0.958 kg/m2) and shall be installed in accordance
with Section 1405.10. Where the interior adhered masonry
veneer is supported by wood construction, the supporting
members shall be designed to limit deflection to 1/600 of the
span of the supporting members.
1405.11 Metal veneers. Veneers of metal shall be fabricated
from approved corrosion-resistant materials or shall be pro-
tected front and back with porcelain enamel, or otherwise be
treated to render the metal resistant to corrosion. Such veneers
shall not be less than 0.0149-inch (0.378 mm) nominal thick-
ness sheet steel mounted on wood or metal furring strips or
approved sheathing on the wood construction.
1405.11.1 Attachment. Exterior metal veneer shall be
securely attached to the supporting masonry or framing
members with corrosion-resistant fastenings, metal ties or
by other approved devices or methods. The spacing of the
fastenings or ties shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) either
vertically or horizontally, but where units exceed 4 square
feet (0.4 m2) in area there shall be not less than four attach-
ments per unit. The metal attachments shall have a

EXTERIOR WALLS

cross-sectional area not less than provided by W 1.7 wire.
Such attachments and their supports shall be capable of
resisting a horizontal force in accordance with the wind
loads specified in Section 1609, but in no case less than 20
psf (0.958 kg/m2).
1405.11.2 Weather protection. Metal supports for exterior
metal veneer shall be protected by painting, galvanizing or
by other equivalent coating or treatment. Wood studs, fur-
ring strips or other wood supports for exterior metal veneer
shall be approved pressure-treated wood or protected as
required in Section 1403.2. Joints and edges exposed to the
weather shall be caulked with approved durable waterproof-
ing material or by other approved means to prevent penetra-
tion of moisture.
1405.11.3 Backup. Masonry backup shall not be required
for metal veneer except as is necessary to meet the fire-resis-
tance requirements of this code.
1405.11.4 Grounding. Grounding of metal veneers on
buildings shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 27
of this code.
1405.12 Glass veneer. The area of a single section of thin exte-
rior structural glass veneer shall not exceed 10 square feet (0.93
m2) where it is not more than 15 feet (4572 mm) above the level
of the sidewalk or grade level directly below, and shall not
exceed 6 square feet (0.56 m2) where it is more than 15 feet
(4572 mm) above that level.
1405.12.1 Length and height. The length or height of any
section of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall not
exceed 48 inches (1219 mm).
1405.12.2 Thickness. The thickness of thin exterior struc-
tural glass veneer shall be not less than 0.344 inch (8.7 mm).
1405.12.3 Application. Thin exterior structural glass
veneer shall be set only after backing is thoroughly dry and
after application of an approved bond coat uniformly over
the entire surface of the backing so as to effectively seal the
surface. Glass shall be set in place with an approved mastic
cement in sufficient quantity so that at least 50 percent of the
area of each glass unit is directly bonded to the backing by
mastic not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick and not more
than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) thick. The bond coat and mastic shall
be evaluated for compatibility and shall bond firmly
together.
1405.12.4 Installation at sidewalk level. Where glass
extends to a sidewalk surface, each section shall rest in an
approved metal molding, and be set at least 1/4 inch (6.4 mm)
above the highest point of the sidewalk. The space between
the molding and the sidewalk shall be thoroughly caulked
and made water tight.
1405.12.4.1 Installation above sidewalk level. Where
thin exterior structural glass veneer is installed above the
level of the top of a bulkhead facing, or at a level more
than 36 inches (914 mm) above the sidewalk level, the
mastic cement binding shall be supplemented with
approved nonferrous metal shelf angles located in the
horizontal joints in every course. Such shelf angles shall
be not less than 0.0478-inch (1.2 mm) thick and not less
than 2 inches (51 mm) long and shall be spaced at

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

281

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:06 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXTERIOR WALLS

approved intervals, with not less than two angles for each
glass unit. Shelf angles shall be secured to the wall or
backing with expansion bolts, toggle bolts or by other
approved methods.
1405.12.5 Joints. Unless otherwise specifically approved
by the building official, abutting edges of thin exterior struc-
tural glass veneer shall be ground square. Mitered joints
shall not be used except where specifically approved for
wide angles. Joints shall be uniformly buttered with an
approved jointing compound and horizontal joints shall be
held to not less than 0.063 inch (1.6 mm) by an approved
nonrigid substance or device. Where thin exterior structural
glass veneer abuts nonresilient material at sides or top,
expansion joints not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) wide shall be
provided.
1405.12.6 Mechanical fastenings. Thin exterior structural
glass veneer installed above the level of the heads of show
windows and veneer installed more than 12 feet (3658 mm)
above sidewalk level shall, in addition to the mastic cement
and shelf angles, be held in place by the use of fastenings at
each vertical or horizontal edge, or at the four corners of
each glass unit. Fastenings shall be secured to the wall or
backing with expansion bolts, toggle bolts or by other meth-
ods. Fastenings shall be so designed as to hold the glass
veneer in a vertical plane independent of the mastic cement.
Shelf angles providing both support and fastenings shall be
permitted.
1405.12.7 Flashing. Exposed edges of thin exterior struc-
tural glass veneer shall be flashed with overlapping corro-
sion-resistant metal flashing and caulked with a waterproof
compound in a manner to effectively prevent the entrance of
moisture between the glass veneer and the backing.
1405.13 Exterior windows and doors. Windows and doors
installed in exterior walls shall conform to the testing and per-
formance requirements of Section 1715.5.
1405.13.1 Installation. Windows and doors shall be
installed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s
instructions. Fastener size and spacing shall be provided in
such instructions and shall be calculated based on maximum
loads and spacing used in the tests.
1405.13.2 Window sills. In Occupancy Groups R-2 and
R-3, one- and two-family and multiple-family dwellings,
where the opening of the sill portion of an operable window
is located more than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the fin-
ished grade or other surface below, the lowest part of the
clear opening of the window shall be at a height not less than
24 inches (610 mm) above the finished floor surface of the
room in which the window is located. Glazing between the
floor and a height of 24 inches (610 mm) shall be fixed or
have openings through which a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter
sphere cannot pass.
Exception: Openings that are provided with window
guards that comply with ASTM F 2006 or F 2090.
1405.14 Vinyl siding. Vinyl siding conforming to the require-
ments of this section and complying with ASTM D 3679 shall
be permitted on exterior walls of buildings located in areas

where the basic wind speed specified in Chapter 16 does not
exceed 100 miles per hour (45 m/s) and the building height is
less than or equal to 40 feet (12 192 mm) in Exposure C. Where
construction is located in areas where the basic wind speed
exceeds 100 miles per hour (45 m/s), or building heights are in
excess of 40 feet (12 192 mm), tests or calculations indicating
compliance with Chapter 16 shall be submitted. Vinyl siding
shall be secured to the building so as to provide weather protec-
tion for the exterior walls of the building.
1405.14.1 Application. The siding shall be applied over
sheathing or materials listed in Section 2304.6. Siding shall
be applied to conform with the water-resistive barrier
requirements in Section 1403. Siding and accessories shall
be installed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s
instructions. Unless otherwise specified in the approved
manufacturer’s instructions, nails used to fasten the siding
and accessories shall have a minimum 0.313-inch (7.9 mm)
head diameter and 1/8-inch (3.18 mm) shank diameter. The
nails shall be corrosion resistant and shall be long enough to
penetrate the studs or nailing strip at least 3/4 inch (19 mm).
Where the siding is installed horizontally, the fastener spac-
ing shall not exceed 16 inches (406 mm) horizontally and 12
inches (305 mm) vertically. Where the siding is installed
vertically, the fastener spacing shall not exceed 12 inches
(305 mm) horizontally and 12 inches (305 mm) vertically.
1405.15 Cement plaster. Cement plaster applied to exterior
walls shall conform to the requirements specified in Chapter
25.
1405.16 Fiber-cement siding. Fiber-cement siding comply-
ing with Section 1404.10 shall be permitted on exterior walls of
Type I, II, III, IV and V construction for wind pressure resis-
tance or wind speed exposures as indicated by the manufac-
turer’s listing and label and approved installation instructions.
Where specified, the siding shall be installed over sheathing or
materials listed in Section 2304.6 and shall be installed to con-
form to the water-resistive barrier requirements in Section
1403. Siding and accessories shall be installed in accordance
with approved manufacturer’s instructions. Unless otherwise
specified in the approved manufacturer’s instructions, nails
used to fasten the siding to wood studs shall be corrosion-resis-
tant round head smooth shank and shall be long enough to pen-
etrate the studs at least 1 inch (25 mm). For metal framing,
all-weather screws shall be used and shall penetrate the metal
framing at least three full threads.
1405.16.1 Panel siding. Fiber-cement panels shall comply
with the requirements of ASTM C 1186, Type A, minimum
Grade II. Panels shall be installed with the long dimension
either parallel or perpendicular to framing. Vertical and hor-
izontal joints shall occur over framing members and shall be
sealed with caulking, covered with battens or shall be
designed to comply with Section 1403.2. Panel siding shall
be installed with fasteners in accordance with the approved
manufacturer’s instructions.
1405.16.2 Lap siding. Fiber-cement lap siding having a
maximum width of 12 inches (305 mm) shall comply with
the requirements of ASTM C 1186, Type A, minimum
Grade II. Lap siding shall be lapped a minimum of 11/4

282

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:07 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

inches (32 mm) and lap siding not having tongue-and-
groove end joints shall have the ends sealed with caulking,
covered with an H-section joint cover, located over a strip of
flashing or shall be designed to comply with Section
1403.2. Lap siding courses shall be installed with the fas-
tener heads exposed or concealed in accordance with the
approved manufacturer’s instructions.
1405.17 Fastening. Weather boarding and wall coverings shall
be securely fastened with aluminum, copper, zinc, zinc-coated
or other approved corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance
with the nailing schedule in Table 2304.9.1 or the approved
manufacturer’s installation instructions. Shingles and other
weather coverings shall be attached with appropriate stan-
dard-shingle nails to furring strips securely nailed to studs, or
with approved mechanically bonding nails, except where
sheathing is of wood not less than 1-inch (25 mm) nominal
thickness or of wood structural panels as specified in Table
2308.9.3(3).

SECTION 1406
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS ON THE EXTERIOR
SIDE OF EXTERIOR WALLS

1406.1 General. Section 1406 shall apply to exterior wall cov-
erings; balconies and similar projections; and bay and oriel
windows constructed of combustible materials.
1406.2 Combustible exterior wall coverings. Combustible
exterior wall coverings shall comply with this section.
Exception: Plastics complying with Chapter 26.
1406.2.1 Ignition resistance. Combustible exterior wall
coverings shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 268.
Exceptions:
1 Wood or wood-based products.
2. Other combustible materials covered with an exte-
rior covering other than vinyl sidings listed in
Table 1405.2.
3. Aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.019
inch (0.48 mm).
4. Exterior wall coverings on exterior walls of Type
V construction.
1406.2.1.1 Fire separation 5 feet or less. Where

installed on exterior walls having a fire separation dis-
tance of 5 feet (1524 mm) or less, combustible exterior
wall coverings shall not exhibit sustained flaming as
defined in NFPA 268.
1406.2.1.2 Fire separation greater than 5 feet. For fire
separation distances greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), an
assembly shall be permitted that has been exposed to a
reduced level of incident radiant heat flux in accordance
with the NFPA 268 test method without exhibiting sus-
tained flaming. The minimum fire separation distance
required for the assembly shall be determined from Table
1406.2.1.2 based on the maximum tolerable level of inci-
dent radiant heat flux that does not cause sustained flam-
ing of the assembly.

EXTERIOR WALLS

TABLE 1406.2.1.2
MINIMUM FIRE SEPARATION FOR COMBUSTIBLE VENEERS

FIRE
SEPARATION
DISTANCE
(feet)

TOLERABLE
LEVEL INCIDENT
RADIANT HEAT
ENERGY(kW/m2)

FIRE
SEPARATION
DISTANCE
(feet)

TOLERABLE
LEVEL INCIDENT
RADIANT HEAT
ENERGY(kW/m2)

5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

12.5
11.8
11.0
10.3
9.6
8.9
8.3
7.7
7.2
6.7
6.3

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

5.9
5.5
5.2
4.9
4.6
4.4
4.1
3.9
3.7
3.5

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 Btu/H2 × °F = 0.0057 kW/m2 × K.

1406.2.2 Type I, II, III and IV construction. On buildings
of Type I, II, III and IV construction, exterior wall coverings
shall be permitted to be constructed of wood in accordance
with Section 1405.5, or other equivalent combustible mate-
rial, complying with the following limitations:
1. Combustible exterior wall coverings shall not exceed
10 percent of an exterior wall surface area where the
fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less.
2. Combustible architectural trim shall be limited to 40
feet (12 192 mm) in height above grade.
3. Combustible exterior wall coverings constructed of
fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section
2303.2 for exterior installation shall not be limited in
wall surface area where the fire separation distance is
5 feet (1524 mm) or less and shall be permitted up to
60 feet (18 288 mm) in height above grade regardless
of the fire separation distance.
1406.2.3 Location. Where combustible exterior wall cov-
ering is located along the top of exterior walls, such trim
shall be completely backed up by the exterior wall and shall
not extend over or above the top of exterior walls.
1406.2.4 Fireblocking. Where the combustible exterior
wall covering is furred from the wall and forms a solid sur-
face, the distance between the back of the covering and the
wall shall not exceed 15/8 inches (41 mm). Where required
by Section 717,
the space thereby created shall be
fireblocked.
1406.3 Balconies and similar projections. Balconies and
similar projections of combustible construction other than
fire-retardant-treated wood shall be fire-resistance rated in
accordance with Table 601 for floor construction or shall be of
Type IV construction in accordance with Section 602.4. The
aggregate length shall not exceed 50 percent of the buildings
perimeter on each floor.
Exceptions:
1. On buildings of Type I and II construction, three sto-
ries or less above grade plane, fire-retardant-treated
wood shall be permitted for balconies, porches, decks
and exterior stairways not used as required exits.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

283

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:07 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXTERIOR WALLS

2. Untreated wood is permitted for pickets and rails or
similar guardrail devices that are limited to 42 inches
(1067 mm) in height.
3. Balconies and similar projections on buildings of
Type III, IV and V construction shall be permitted to
be of Type V construction, and shall not be required to
have a fire-resistance rating where sprinkler protec-
tion is extended to these areas.
4. Where sprinkler protection is extended to the balcony
areas, the aggregate length of the balcony on each
floor shall not be limited.
1406.4 Bay windows and oriel windows. Bay and oriel win-
dows shall conform to the type of construction required for the
building to which they are attached.
Exception: Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted
on buildings three stories or less of Type I, II, III and IV con-
struction.

the building official that the required fire-resistance rating is
maintained.

Exception: MCM systems not containing foam plastic
insulation, which are installed on the outer surface of a
fire-resistance-rated exterior wall in a manner such that the
attachments do not penetrate through the entire exterior
wall assembly, shall not be required to comply with this sec-
tion.

1407.9 Surface-burning characteristics. Unless otherwise
specified, MCM shall have a flame spread index of 75 or less
and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in the
maximum thickness intended for use in accordance with
ASTM E 84 or UL 723.

1407.10 Type I, II, III and IV construction. Where installed
on buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction, MCM sys-
tems shall comply with Sections 1407.10.1 through 1407.10.4,
or Section1407.11.

SECTION 1407
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIALS (MCM)

1407.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
materials, construction and quality of metal composite materi-
als (MCM) for use as exterior wall coverings in addition to
other applicable requirements of Chapters 14 and 16.
1407.1.1 Plastic core. The plastic core of the MCM shall
not contain foam plastic insulation as defined in Section
2602.1.
1407.2 Exterior wall finish. MCM used as exterior wall finish
or as elements of balconies and similar projections and bay and
oriel windows to provide cladding or weather resistance shall
comply with Sections 1407.4 through 1407.1 4.
1407.3 Architectural trim and embellishments. MCM used
as architectural trim or embellishments shall comply with Sec-
tions 1407.7 through 1407.1 4.
1407.4 Structural design. MCM systems shall be designed
and constructed to resist wind loads as required by Chapter 16
for components and cladding.
1407.5 Approval. Results of approved tests or an engineering
analysis shall be submitted to the building official to verify
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 16 for wind
loads.
1407.6 Weather resistance. MCM systems shall comply with
Section 1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist
wind and rain in accordance with this section and the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1407.7 Durability. MCM systems shall be constructed of
approved materials that maintain the performance characteris-
tics required in Section 1407 for the duration of use.
1407.8 Fire-resistance rating. Where MCM systems are used
on exterior walls required to have a fire-resistance rating in
accordance with Section 705, evidence shall be submitted to

1407.10.1 Surface-burning characteristics. MCM shall
have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-
developed index of not more than 450 when tested as an
assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use in
accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.

1407.10.2 Thermal barriers. MCM shall be separated
from the interior of a building by an approved thermal bar-
rier consisting of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard or
equivalent thermal barrier material that will limit the aver-
age temperature rise of the unexposed surface to not more
than 250°F (121°C) after 15 minutes of fire exposure in
accordance with the standard time-temperature curve of
ASTM E 119 or UL 263. The thermal barrier shall be
installed in such a manner that it will remain in place for not
less than 15 minutes based on a test conducted in accor-
dance with UL 1715.

1407.10.3 Thermal barrier not required. The thermal
barrier specified for MCM in Section 1407.10.2 is not
required where:
1. The MCM system is specifically approved based on
tests conducted in accordance with UL 1040 or UL
1715. Such testing shall be performed with the MCM
in the maximum thickness intended for use. The
MCM system shall include seams, joints and other
typical details used in the installation and shall be
tested in the manner intended for use.
2. The MCM is used as elements of balconies and simi-
lar projections, architectural trim or embellishments.
1407.10.4 Full-scale tests. The MCM system shall be
tested in accordance with, and comply with, the acceptance
criteria of NFPA 285. Such testing shall be performed on the
MCM system with the MCM in the maximum thickness
intended for use.

1407.11 Alternate conditions. MCM and MCM systems shall
not be required to comply with Sections 1407.10.1 through

284

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

14_ibc_2009pg284.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:22:48 AM

8

EXTERIOR WALLS

2273 and is required on framed walls of Type V construc-
tion and Group R1, R2, R3 and R4 occupancies.
1408.4.1.1 Water-resistive barrier. For EIFS with
drainage, the water-resistive barrier shall comply with
Section 1404.2 or ASTM E 2570.
1408.5 Installation. Installation of the EIFS and EIFS with
drainage shall be in accordance with the EIFS manufacturer’s
instructions.
1408.6 Special inspections. EIFS installations shall comply
with the provisions of Sections 1704.1 and 1704.14.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1407 .10 .4 prov ided such sys tems comp ly w ith Sec tion
1407.11.1 or 1407.11.2.
1407.11.1 Installations up to 40 feet in height. MCM shall
not be installed more than 40 feet (12 190 mm) in height
above grade where installed in accordance with Sections
1407.11.1.1 and 1407.11.1.2.
1407.11.1.1 Fire separation distance of 5 feet or less.
Where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or
less, the area of MCM shall not exceed 10 percent of the
exterior wall surface.

1407.11.1.2 Fire separation distance greater than 5
feet. Where the fire separation distance is greater than 5
feet (1524 mm), there shall be no limit on the area of exte-
rior wall surface coverage using MCM.
1407.11.2 Installations up to 50 feet in height. MCM shall
not be installed more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in height
above grade where installed in accordance with Sections
1407.11.2.1 and 1407.11.2.2.
1407.11.2.1 Self-ignition temperature. MCM shall
have a self-ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or
greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D 1929.
1407.11.2.2 Limitations. Sections of MCM shall not
exceed 300 square feet (27.9 m2) in area and shall be sep-
arated by a minimum of 4 feet (1219 mm) vertically.
1407.12 Type V construction. MCM shall be permitted to be
installed on buildings of Type V construction.
1407.13 Foam plastic insulation. MCM systems containing
foam plastic insulation shall also comply with the requirements
of Section 2603.
1407.14 Labeling. MCM shall be labeled in accordance with
Section 1703.5.

SECTION 1408
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS
(EIFS)

1408.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
materials, construction and quality of exterior insulation and
finish systems (EIFS) for use as exterior wall coverings in addi-
tion to other applicable requirements of Chapters 7, 14, 16, 17
and 26.
1408.2 Performance characteristics. EIFS shall be con-
structed such that it meets the performance characteristics
required in ASTM E 2568.
1408.3 Structural design. The underlying structural framing
and substrate shall be designed and constructed to resist loads
as required by Chapter 16.
1408.4 Weather resistance. EIFS shall comply with Section
1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and
rain in accordance with this section and the manufacturer’s
application instructions.
1408.4.1 EIFS with drainage. EIFS with drainage shall
have an average minimum drainage efficiency of 90 percent
when tested in accordance the requirements of ASTM E

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

285

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:08 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

286

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

14_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:12)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:24:08 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

CHAPTER 15

SECTION 1501
GENERAL

1501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
design, materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies,
and rooftop structures.

SECTION 1502
DEFINITIONS

1502.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
AGGREGATE. In roofing, crushed stone, crushed slag or
water-worn gravel used for surfacing for roof coverings.
BALLAST. In roofing, ballast comes in the form of large
stones or paver systems or light-weight interlocking paver sys-
tems and is used to provide uplift resistance for roofing systems
that are not adhered or mechanically attached to the roof deck.
BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt
cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral
aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.
INTERLAYMENT. A layer of felt or nonbituminous satu-
rated felt not less than 18 inches (457 mm) wide, shingled
between each course of a wood-shake roof covering.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN . A partially
enclosed rooftop structure used to aesthetically conceal heat-
ing, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) electrical or
mechanical equipment from view.
METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having
a minimum installed weather exposure of 3 square feet (0.279
m2) per sheet.
METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet hav-
ing an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.279
m2) per sheet.
MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more
layers of polymer-modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials
shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate
or held in place with an approved ballast layer.
PENTHOUSE. An enclosed, unoccupied structure above the
roof of a building, other than a tank, tower, spire, dome cupola
or bulkhead.
POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. The drainage condition in
which consideration has been made for all loading deflections
of the roof deck, and additional slope has been provided to
ensure drainage of the roof within 48 hours of precipitation.

REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an
existing roof covering. See “Roof recover” and “Roof replace-
ment.”
ROOF ASSEMBLY. A system designed to provide weather
protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists
of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving
as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly
includes the roof deck, vapor retarder, substrate or thermal bar-
rier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering.
The definition of “Roof assembly” is limited in application
to the provisions of Chapter 15.
ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck
for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.
ROOF COVERING SYSTEM. See “Roof assembly.”
ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface not including its sup-
porting members or vertical supports.
ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional
roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without
removing the existing roof covering.
ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an
existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.
ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the exist-
ing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and install-
ing a new roof covering.
ROOF VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process
of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing
such air from, attics, cathedral ceilings or other enclosed spaces
over which a roof assembly is installed.
ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. An enclosed structure on or
above the roof of any part of a building.
SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water
to drain from a roof.
SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is
field applied using one layer of membrane material (either
homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.
UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of felt, sheathing
paper, nonbituminous saturated felt or other approved material
over which a steep-slope roof covering is applied.

SECTION 1503
WEATHER PROTECTION

1503.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved
roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accor-
dance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof coverings shall
be designed and installed in accordance with this code and the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

287

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:36 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

approved manufacturer’s instructions such that the roof cover-
ing shall serve to protect the building or structure.
1503.2 Flashing. Flashing shall be installed in such a manner
so as to prevent moisture entering the wall and roof through
joints in copings, through moisture-permeable materials and at
intersections with parapet walls and other penetrations through
the roof plane.
1503.2.1 Locations. Flashing shall be installed at wall and
roof intersections, at gutters, wherever there is a change in
roof slope or direction and around roof openings. Where
flashing is of metal, the metal shall be corrosion resistant
with a thickness of not less than 0.019 inch (0.483 mm) (No.
26 galvanized sheet).
1503.3 Coping. Parapet walls shall be properly coped with
noncombustible, weatherproof materials of a width no less
than the thickness of the parapet wall.
[P] 1503.4 Roof drainage. Design and installation of roof
drainage systems shall comply with Section 1503 and the
International Plumbing Code.

1503.4.1 Secondary drainage required. Secondary (emer-
gency) roof drains or scuppers shall be provided where the
roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a
manner that water will be entrapped if the primary drains
allow buildup for any reason.
1503.4.2 Scuppers. When scuppers are used for secondary
(emergency overflow) roof drainage, the quantity, size,
location and inlet elevation of the scuppers shall be sized to
prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for
which the roof was designed as determined by Section
1503.4.1. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of
less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary
system shall not be considered when locating and sizing
scuppers.
1503.4.3 Gutters. Gutters and leaders placed on the outside
of buildings, other than Group R-3, private garages and
buildings
of Type V construction,
shall
be
of
noncombustible material or a minimum of Schedule 40
plastic pipe.
1503.5 Roof ventilation. Intake and exhaust vents shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 1203.2 and the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1503.6 Crickets and saddles. A cricket or saddle shall be
installed on the ridge side of any chimney or penetration
greater than 30 inches (762 mm) wide as measured perpendicu-
lar to the slope. Cricket or saddle coverings shall be sheet metal
or of the same material as the roof covering.

SECTION 1504
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1504.1 Wind resistance of roofs. Roof decks and roof cover-
ings shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with Chap-
ter 16 and Sections 1504.2, 1504.3 and 1504.4.
1504.1.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles. Asphalt
shingles shall comply with Section 1507.2.7.

1504.2 Wind resistance of clay and concrete tile. Wind loads
on clay and concrete tile roof coverings shall be in accordance
with Section 1609.5.
1504.3 Wind resistance of nonballasted roofs. Roof cover-
ings installed on roofs in accordance with Section 1507 that are
mechanically attached or adhered to the roof deck shall be
designed to resist the design wind load pressures for compo-
nents and cladding in accordance with Section 1609.
1504.3.1 Other roof systems. Roof systems with built-up,
modified bitumen, fully adhered or mechanically attached
single-ply through fastened metal panel roof systems, and
other types of membrane roof coverings shall also be tested
in accordance with FM 4474, UL 580 or UL 1897.
1504.3.2 Metal panel roof systems. Metal panel roof sys-
tems through fastened or standing seam shall be tested in
accordance with UL 580 or ASTM E 1592.
Exception: Metal roofs constructed of cold-formed
steel, where the roof deck acts as the roof covering and
provides both weather protection and support for struc-
tural loads, shall be permitted to be designed and tested
in accordance with the applicable referenced structural
design standard in Section 2209.1.
1504.4 Ballasted low-slope roof systems. Ballasted low-slope
(roof slope < 2:12) single-ply roof system coverings installed
in accordance with Sections 1507.12 and 1507.13 shall be
designed in accordance with Section 1504.8 and ANSI/SPRI
RP-4.
1504.5 Edge securement for low-slope roofs. Low-slope
membrane roof system metal edge securement, except gutters,
shall be designed and installed for wind loads in accordance
with Chapter 16 and tested for resistance in accordance with
ANSI/SPRI ES-1, except the basic wind speed shall be deter-
mined from Figure 1609.
1504.6 Physical properties. Roof coverings installed on
low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section
1507 shall demonstrate physical integrity over the working life
of the roof based upon 2,000 hours of exposure to accelerated
weathering tests conducted in accordance with ASTM G 152,
ASTM G 155 or ASTM G 154. Those roof coverings that are
subject to cyclical flexural response due to wind loads shall not
demonstrate any significant loss of tensile strength for
unreinforced membranes or breaking strength for reinforced
membranes when tested as herein required.
1504.7 Impact resistance. Roof coverings installed on
low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section
1507 shall resist impact damage based on the results of tests
conducted in accordance with ASTM D 3746, ASTM D 4272,
CGSB 37-GP-52M or the “Resistance to Foot Traffic Test” in
Section 5.5 of FM 4470.
1504.8 Aggregate. Aggregate used as surfacing for roof cover-
ings and aggregate, gravel or stone used as ballast shall not be
used on the roof of a building located in a hurricane-prone
region as defined in Section 1609.2, or on any other building
with a mean roof height exceeding that permitted by Table
1504.8 based on the exposure category and basic wind speed at
the site.

288

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:37 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1504.8
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE MEAN ROOF HEIGHT PERMITTED FOR
BUILDINGS WITH AGGREGATE ON THE ROOF IN AREAS
OUTSIDE A HURRICANE-PRONE REGION

BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609
(mph)b

85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Greater than 120

MAXIMUM MEAN ROOF HEIGHT (ft)a, c
Exposure category

B

170
110
75
55
40
30
20
15
NP

C

60
35
20
15
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

D

30
15
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Mean roof height as defined in ASCE 7.
b. For intermediate values of basic wind speed, the height associated with the
next higher value of wind speed shall be used, or direct interpolation is per-
mitted.
c. NP = gravel and stone not permitted for any roof height.

SECTION 1505
FIRE CLASSIFICATION

1505.1 General. Roof assemblies shall be divided into the
classes defined below. Class A, B and C roof assemblies and
roof coverings required to be listed by this section shall be
tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition,
fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested in
accordance with ASTM D 2898. The minimum roof coverings
installed on buildings shall comply with Table 1505.1 based on
the type of construction of the building.
Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with
Chapter 24 or Section 2610.

TABLE 1505.1a, b
MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION
FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA
B

IB
B

IIA
B

IIB
Cc

IIIA IIIB
B
Cc

IV
B

VA
B

VB
Cc

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a . Un l e s s o th e rw i s e r equ i r ed in a c co rd an c e w i th th e In t e r na t iona l
Wildland-Urban Interface Code or due to the location of the building within
a fire district in accordance with Appendix D.
b. Nonclassified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of Group R-3
and Group U occupancies, where there is a minimum fire-separation dis-
tance of 6 feet measured from the leading edge of the roof.
c. Buildings that are not more than two stories above grade plane and having
not more than 6,000 square feet of projected roof area and where there is a
minimum 10-foot fire-separation distance from the leading edge of the roof
to a lot line on all sides of the building, except for street fronts or public ways,
shall be permitted to have roofs of No. 1 cedar or redwood shakes and No. 1
shingles.

1505.2 Class A roof assemblies. Class A roof assemblies are
those that are effective against severe fire test exposure. Class
A roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identi-
fied as Class A by an approved testing agency. Class A roof

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

assemblies shall be permitted for use in buildings or structures
of all types of construction.
Exceptions:
1. Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings
of brick, masonry or an exposed concrete roof deck.
2. Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or cop-
per shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay
or concrete roof tile or slate installed on noncombusti-
ble decks or ferrous, copper or metal sheets installed
without a roof deck on noncombustible framing.
1505.3 Class B roof assemblies. Class B roof assemblies are
those that are effective against moderate fire-test exposure.
Class B roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and
identified as Class B by an approved testing agency.
1505.4 Class C roof assemblies. Class C roof assemblies are
those that are effective against light fire-test exposure. Class C
roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identi-
fied as Class C by an approved testing agency.
1505 .5 Nonc lass ified roofing. Nonc lass ified roofing is
approved material that is not listed as a Class A, B or C roof
covering.
1505.6 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles shall be
treated by impregnation with chemicals by the full-cell vac-
uum-pressure process, in accordance with AWPA C1. Each
bundle shall be marked to identify the manufactured unit and
the manufacturer, and shall also be labeled to identify the clas-
sification of the material in accordance with the testing
required in Section 1505.1, the treating company and the qual-
ity control agency.
1505.7 Special purpose roofs. Special purpose wood shingle
or wood shake roofing shall conform with the grading and
application requirements of Section 1507.8 or 1507.9. In addi-
t ion , an und e r laym en t o f 5 / 8 - in ch (15 .9 mm ) Typ e X
water-resistant gypsum backing board or gypsum sheathing
shall be placed under minimum nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7
mm) wood structural panel solid sheathing or 1-inch (25 mm)
nominal spaced sheathing.

SECTION 1506
MATERIALS

1506.1 Scope. The requirements set forth in this section shall
apply to the application of roof-covering materials specified
herein. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with this
chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Instal-
lation of roof coverings shall comply with the applicable provi-
sions of Section 1507.
1506.2 Compatibility of materials. Roofs and roof coverings
shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and
with the building or structure to which the materials are
applied.
1506.3 Material specifications and physical characteristics.
Roof-covering materials shall conform to the applicable stan-
dards listed in this chapter. In the absence of applicable stan-
dards or where materials are of questionable suitability, testing

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

289

15_ibc_2009pg289.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:26:21 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

by an approved agency shall be required by the building code
official to determine the character, quality and limitations of
application of the materials.
1506.4 Product identification. Roof-covering materials shall
be delivered in packages bearing the manufacturer’s identify-
ing marks and approved testing agency labels required in
accordance with Section 1505. Bulk shipments of materials
shall be accompanied with the same information issued in the
form of a certificate or on a bill of lading by the manufacturer.

SECTION 1507
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS

1507.1 Scope. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this section and the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1507.2 Asphalt shingles. The installation of asphalt shingles
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.2.1 Deck requirements. Asphalt shingles shall be fas-
tened to solidly sheathed decks.
1507.2.2 Slope. Asphalt shingles shall only be used on roof
slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-per-
cent slope) or greater. For roof slopes from two units vertical
in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope) up to four units ver-
tical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope), double
underlayment application is required in accordance with
Section 1507.2.8.
1507.2.3 Underlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required
underlayment shall conform to ASTM D 226, Type I,
ASTM D 4869, Type I, or ASTM D 6757.
1507.2.4 Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet.
Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall com-
ply with ASTM D 1970.
1507.2.5 Asphalt shingles. Asphalt shingles shall comply
with ASTM D 225 or ASTM D 3462.
1507.2.6 Fasteners. Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be
galvanized, stainless steel, aluminum or copper roofing
nails, minimum 12 gage [0.105 inch (2.67 mm)] shank with
a minimum 3/8 inch-diameter (9.5 mm) head, of a length to
penetrate through the roofing materials and a minimum of
3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the roof sheathing. Where the roof
sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) thick, the nails shall
penetrate through the sheathing. Fasteners shall comply
with ASTM F 1667.
1507.2.7 Attachment. Asphalt shingles shall have the min-
imum number of fasteners required by the manufacturer, but
not less than four fasteners per strip shingle or two fasteners
per individual shingle. Where the roof slope exceeds 21
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21:12), shingles shall be
installed as required by the manufacturer.
1507.2.7.1 Wind resistance. Asphalt shingles shall be
tested in accordance with ASTM D 7158. Asphalt shin-
gles shall meet the classification requirements of Table
1507.2.7.1(1) for the appropriate maximum basic wind
speed. Asphalt shingle packaging shall bear a label to

290

indicate comp liance w ith ASTM D 7158 and the
required classification in Table 1507.2.7.1(1).

Exception: Asphalt shingles not included in the
scope of ASTM D 7158 shall be tested and labeled to
indicate compliance with ASTM D 3161 and the
required classification in Table 1507.2.7.1(2).

TABLE 1507.2.7.1(1)
CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT ROOF SHINGLES
PER ASTM D 7158a

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609

CLASSIFICATION
REQUIREMENT

85

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

D, G or H

D, G or H

G or H

G or H

G or H

H

H

H

a. The standard calculations contained in ASTM D 7158 assume exposure cat-
egory B or C and building height of 60 feet (18 288 mm) or less. Additional
calculations are required for conditions outside of these assumptions.

TABLE 1507.2.7.1(2)
CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT SHINGLES PER ASTM D 3161

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609

CLASSIFICATION
REQUIREMENT

85

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

A, D or F

A, D or F

A, D or F

F

F

F

F

F

1507.2.8 Underlayment application. For roof slopes from
two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope)
and up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-per-
cent slope), underlayment shall be two layers applied in the
following manner. Apply a minimum 19-inch-wide (483
mm) strip of underlayment felt parallel with and starting at
the eaves, fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Starting at
the eave, apply 36-inch-wide (914 mm)
sheets of
underlayment overlapping successive sheets 19 inches (483
mm), by fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in
the underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the
shingles to seal. For roof slopes of four units vertical in 12
units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater, underlayment
shall be one layer applied in the following manner.
Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion, parallel to
and starting from the eave and lapped 2 inches (51 mm), fas-
tened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:37 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the shin-
gles to seal.
1507.2.8.1 High wind attachment. Underlayment
applied in areas subject to high winds (greater than 110
mph in accordance with Figure 1609) shall be applied
with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Fasteners are to be applied
along the overlap at a maximum spacing of 36 inches
(914 mm) on center.
1507.2.8.2 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a
history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water, an ice barrier that consists of at least two layers
of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of
normal underlayment and extend from the lowest edges
of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm)
inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con-
tain no conditioned floor area.
1507.2.9 Flashings. Flashing for asphalt shingles shall
comply with this section. Flashing shall be applied in accor-
dance with this section and the asphalt shingle manufac-
turer’s printed instructions.
1507.2.9.1 Base and cap flashing. Base and cap flash-
ing shall be installed in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s instructions. Base flashing shall be of either
c o r r o s i o n - r e s i s t a n t m e t a l o f m i n im um n om i n a l
0.019-inch (0.483 mm) thickness or mineral-surfaced
roll roofing weighing a minimum of 77 pounds per 100
square feet (3.76 kg/m2). Cap flashing shall be corro-
sion-resistant metal of minimum nominal 0.019-inch
(0.483 mm) thickness.
1507.2.9.2 Valleys. Valley linings shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions before

applying shingles. Valley linings of the following types
shall be permitted:

1. For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with
metal, the valley lining shall be at least 24 inches
(610 mm) wide and of any of the corrosion-resis-
tant metals in Table 1507.2.9.2.
2. For open valleys, valley lining of two plies of min-
eral-surfaced roll roofing complying with ASTM
D 3909 or ASTM D 6380 shall be permitted. The
bottom layer shall be 18 inches (457 mm) and the
top layer a minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) wide.
3. For closed valleys (valleys covered with shingles),
valley lining of one ply of smooth roll roofing
complying with ASTM D 6380, and at least 36
inches (914 mm) wide or types as described in
Item 1 or 2 above shall be permitted. Self-adhering
polymer modified bitumen underlayment comply-
ing with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted in lieu
of the lining material.
1507.2.9.3 Drip edge. Provide drip edge at eaves and
gables of shingle roofs. Overlap to be a minimum of 2
inches (51 mm). Eave drip edges shall extend 1/4 inch (6.4
mm) below sheathing and extend back on the roof a mini-
mum of 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edge shall be mechani-
cally fastened a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c.

1507.3 Clay and concrete tile. The installation of clay and
concrete tile shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall
be installed only over solid sheathing or spaced structural
sheathing boards.

1507.3.2 Deck slope. Clay and concrete roof tile shall be
installed on roof slopes of 21/2 units vertical in 12 units hori-
zontal (21-percent slope) or greater. For roof slopes from

MATERIAL

MINIMUM THICKNESS

GAGE

TABLE 1507.2.9.2
VALLEY LINING MATERIAL

Aluminum

Cold-rolled copper

Copper

Galvanized steel

High-yield copper

Lead

Lead-coated copper

Lead-coated high-yield copper

Painted terne

Stainless steel

Zinc alloy

0.024 in.

0.0216 in.

—

0.0179 in.

0.0162 in.

—

0.0216 in.

0.0162 in.

—

—

0.027 in.

—

—

—

26 (zinc-coated G90)

—

—

—

—

—

28

—

WEIGHT

—

ASTM B 370, 16 oz. per square ft.

16 oz

—

ASTM B 370, 12 oz. per square ft.

2.5 pounds

ASTM B 101, 16 oz. per square ft.

ASTM B 101, 12 oz. per square ft.

20 pounds

—

—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 ounce = 28.35 g, 1 square foot = 0.093m2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

291

15_ibc_2009pg291.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:58:25 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

21/2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21-percent slope) to
four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope),
double underlayment application is required in accordance
with Section 1507.3.3.

1507.3.3 Underlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required
underlayment shall conform to: ASTM D 226, Type II;
ASTM D 2626 or ASTM D 6380, Class M mineral-surfaced
roll roofing.
1507.3.3.1 Low-slope roofs. For roof slopes from 21/2
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21-percent slope),
up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope), underlayment shall be a minimum of two layers
applied as follows:
1. Starting at the eave, a 19-inch (483 mm) strip of
underlayment shall be applied parallel with the
eave and fastened sufficiently in place.
2. Starting at the eave, 36-inch-wide (914 mm) strips
of underlayment felt shall be applied overlapping
successive sheets 19 inches (483 mm) and fas-
tened sufficiently in place.
1507.3.3.2 High-slope roofs. For roof slopes of four
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) or
greater, underlayment shall be a minimum of one layer of
underlayment felt applied shingle fashion, parallel to,
and starting from the eaves and lapped 2 inches (51 mm),
fastened only as necessary to hold in place.

1507.3.4 Clay tile. Clay roof tile shall comply with ASTM
C 1167.

1507.3.5 Concrete tile. Concrete roof tile shall comply
with ASTM C 1492.

1507.3.6 Fasteners. Tile fasteners shall be corrosion resis-
tant and not less than 11 gage, 5/16-inch (8.0 mm) head, and
of sufficient length to penetrate the deck a minimum of 3/4
inch (19.1 mm) or through the thickness of the deck, which-
ever is less. Attaching wire for clay or concrete tile shall not
be smaller than 0.083 inch (2.1 mm). Perimeter fastening
areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches
(914 mm) from either side of hips or ridges and edges of
eaves and gable rakes.

1507.3.7 Attachment. Clay and concrete roof tiles shall be
fastened in accordance with Table 1507.3.7.

1507.3.8 Application. Tile shall be applied according to the
manufacturer’s installation instructions, based on the fol-
lowing:
1. Climatic conditions.
2. Roof slope.
3. Underlayment system.
4. Type of tile being installed.

1507.3.9 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof vertical sur-
faces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch
(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley, or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solid
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.4 Metal roof panels. The installation of metal roof pan-
els shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.4.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof panel roof cover-
ings shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except
where the roof covering is specifically designed to be
applied to spaced supports.
1507.4.2 Deck slope. Minimum slopes for metal roof pan-
els shall comply with the following:
1. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam
metal roofs without applied lap sealant shall be three
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent
slope).
2. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam
metal roofs with applied lap sealant shall be one-half
unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope).
Lap sealants shall be applied in accordance with the
approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.
3. The minimum slope for standing seam of roof sys-
tems shall be one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units hori-
zontal (2-percent slope).
1507.4.3 Material standards. Metal-sheet roof covering
systems that incorporate supporting structural members
shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 22.
Metal-sheet roof coverings installed over structural decking
shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials used for
metal-sheet roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion
resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accor-
dance with the standards and minimum thicknesses shown
in Table 1507.4.3(2).

292

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:38 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.3.7
CLAY AND CONCRETE TILE ATTACHMENTa, b, c

GENERAL — CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE

Mean roof
height
(feet)

0-60

0-40

> 40-60

Roof slope up to < 3:12

Roof slope 3:12 and over

One fastener per tile. Flat tile
without vertical laps, two
fasteners per tile.

Two fasteners per tile. Only one fastener on slopes of 7:12 and
less for tiles with installed weight exceeding 7.5 lbs./sq. ft.
having a width no greater than 16 inches.

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails. The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofer’s mastic.

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

INTERLOCKING CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE WITH PROJECTING ANCHOR LUGSd, e
(Installations on spaced/solid sheathing with battens or spaced sheathing)

Mean roof
height
(feet)

0-60

0-40

> 40-60

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

Roof slope up to < 5:12

Roof slope 5:12 < 12:12

Roof slope 12:12 and over

Fasteners are not required. Tiles
with installed weight less than 9
lbs./sq. ft. require a minimum of
one fastener per tile.

One fastener per tile every other
row. All perimeter tiles require
one fastener. Tiles with installed
weight less than 9 lbs./sq. ft.
require a minimum of one
fastener per tile.

One fastener required for
every tile. Tiles with installed
weight less than 9 lbs./sq. ft.
require a minimum of one
fastener per tile.

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofers’s mastic.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

INTERLOCKING CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE WITH PROJECTING ANCHOR LUGS
(Installations on solid sheathing without battens)

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

Mean roof
height
(feet)

All roof slopes

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

0-60

0-40

One fastener per tile.

One fastener per tile.

> 40-60

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofer’s mastic.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square foot = 4.882k g / m 2 .
a. Minimum fastener size. Corrosion-resistant nails not less than No. 11 gage with 5/16-inch head. Fasteners shall be long enough to penetrate into the sheathing 3/4
inch or through the thickness of the sheathing, whichever is less. Attaching wire for clay and concrete tile shall not be smaller than 0.083 inch.
b. Snow areas. A minimum of two fasteners per tile are required or battens and one fastener.
c. Roof slopes greater than 24:12. The nose of all tiles shall be securely fastened.
d. Horizontal battens. Battens shall be not less than 1 inch by 2 inch nominal. Provisions shall be made for drainage by a minimum of 1/8-inch riser at each nail or by
4-foot-long battens with at least a 1/2-inch separation between battens. Horizontal battens are required for slopes over 7:12.
e. Perimeter fastening areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches from either side of hips or ridges and edges of eaves and gable rakes.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

293

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:38 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.4.3(1)
METAL ROOF COVERINGS

ROOF COVERING TYPE

STANDARD APPLICATION
RATE/THICKNESS

Aluminum

ASTM B 209, 0.024 inch minimum
thickness for roll-formed panels and 0.019
inch minimum thickness for press-formed
shingles.

Aluminum-zinc alloy
coated steel

ASTM A 792 AZ 50

Cold-rolled copper

Copper

ASTM B 370 minimum 16 oz./sq. ft. and
12 oz./sq. ft. high yield copper for
metal-sheet roof covering systems:
12 oz/sq. ft. for preformed metal shingle
systems.

16 oz./sq. ft. for metal-sheet roof-covering
systems; 12 oz./sq. ft. for preformed metal
shingle systems.

Galvanized steel

ASTM A 653 G-90 zinc-coateda.

Hard lead

2 lbs./sq. ft.

Lead-coated copper

ASTM B 101

Prepainted steel

ASTM A 755

Soft lead

3 lbs./sq. ft.

Stainless steel

ASTM A 240, 300 Series Alloys

Steel

ASTM A 924

Terne and
terne-coated stainless

Zinc

Terne coating of 40 lbs. per double base
box, field painted where applicable in
accordance with manufacturer’s
installation instructions.

0.027 inch minimum thickness; 99.995%
electrolytic high grade zinc with alloy
additives of copper (0.08% - 0.20%),
titanium (0.07% - 0.12%) and aluminum
(0.015%).

For SI: 1 ounce per square foot = 0.0026 kg/m2,
1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2,
1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
a. For Group U buildings, the minimum coating thickness for ASTM A 653
galvanized steel roofing shall be G-60.

TABLE 1507.4.3(2)
MINIMUM CORROSION RESISTANCE

55% Aluminum-zinc alloy coated steel ASTM A 792 AZ 50

5% Aluminum alloy-coated steel

ASTM A 875 GF60

Aluminum-coated steel

Galvanized steel

Prepainted steel

ASTM A 463 T2 65

ASTM A 653 G-90

ASTM A 755a

a. Paint systems in accordance with ASTM A 755 shall be applied over steel
products with corrosion resistant coatings complying with ASTM A 792,
ASTM A 875, ASTM A 463 or ASTM A 653.

1507.4.4 Attachment. Metal roof panels shall be secured to
the supports in accordance with the approved manufac-
turer’s fasteners. In the absence of manufacturer recommen-
dations, the following fasteners shall be used:
1. Galvanized fasteners shall be used for steel roofs.
2. Copper, brass, bronze, copper alloy or 300 series
stainless-steel fasteners shall be used for copper
roofs.
3. Stainless-steel fasteners are acceptable for all types of
metal roofs.
1507.5 Metal roof shingles. The installation of metal roof
shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.5.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof shingles shall be
applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the
roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to
spaced sheathing.
1507.5.2 Deck slope. Metal roof shingles shall not be
installed on roof slopes below three units vertical in 12 units
horizontal (25-percent slope).
1507.5.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.5.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.5.5 Material standards. Metal roof shingle roof cov-
erings shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials
used for metal-roof shingle roof coverings shall be naturally
corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in
accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses
specified in the standards listed in Table 1507.4.3(2).
1507.5.6 Attachment. Metal roof shingles shall be secured
to the roof in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
1507.5.7 Flashing. Roof valley flashing shall be of corro-
sion-resistant metal of the same material as the roof cover-
ing or shall comply with the standards in Table 1507.4.3(1).
The valley flashing shall extend at least 8 inches (203 mm)
from the centerline each way and shall have a splash diverter
rib not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). In areas
where the average daily temperature in January is 25°F
(-4°C) or less or where there is a possibility of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, the metal valley
flashing shall have a 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment
directly under
it consisting of either one layer of
underlayment running the full length of the valley or a
self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970, in addition to underlayment required

294

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:39 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

for metal
roof
shingles. The metal valley flashing
underlayment shall be solidly cemented to the roofing
underlayment for roof slopes under seven units vertical in
12 units horizontal (58-percent slope) or self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be installed.
1507.6 Mineral-surfaced roll roofing. The installation of
mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall comply with this section.
1507.6.1 Deck requirements. Mineral-surfaced roll roof-
ing shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.
1507.6.2 Deck slope. Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall
not be applied on roof slopes below one unit vertical in 12
units horizontal (8-percent slope).
1507.6.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.6.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.6.5 Material standards. Mineral-surfaced roll roof-
ing shall conform to ASTM D 3909 or ASTM D 6380.
1507.7 Slate shingles. The installation of slate shingles shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.7.1 Deck requirements. Slate shingles shall be fas-
tened to solidly sheathed roofs.
1507.7.2 Deck slope. Slate shingles shall only be used on
slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12) or
greater.
1507.7.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.7.4 Ice barrier. In areas where the average daily tem-
perature in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a
possibility of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water, an ice barrier that consists of at least two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall extend from the lowest
edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610
mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.7.5 Material standards. Slate shingles shall comply
with ASTM C 406.

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.7.6 Application. Minimum headlap for slate shingles
shall be in accordance with Table 1507.7.6. Slate shingles
shall be secured to the roof with two fasteners per slate.

TABLE 1507.7.6
SLATE SHINGLE HEADLAP

SLOPE

4:12 < slope < 8:12

8:12 < slope < 20:12

slope ³ 20:12

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

HEADLAP
(inches)

4

3

2

1507.7.7 Flashing. Flashing and counterflashing shall be
made with sheet metal. Valley flashing shall be a minimum
of 15 inches (381 mm) wide. Valley and flashing metal shall
be a minimum uncoated thickness of 0.0179-inch (0.455
mm) zinc-coated G90. Chimneys, stucco or brick walls
shall have a minimum of two plies of felt for a cap flashing
consisting of a 4-inch-wide (102 mm) strip of felt set in plas-
tic cement and extending 1 inch (25 mm) above the first felt
and a top coating of plastic cement. The felt shall extend
over the base flashing 2 inches (51 mm).
1507.8 Wood shingles. The installation of wood shingles shall
comply with the provisions of this section and Table 1507.8.
1507.8.1 Deck requirements. Wood shingles shall be
installed on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced
sheathing is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than
1-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimensions
and shall be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure
to coincide with the placement of fasteners.
1507.8.1.1 Solid sheathing required. Solid sheathing is
required in areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of
water.
1507.8.2 Deck slope. Wood shingles shall be installed on
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) or greater.
1507.8.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.8.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

295

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:39 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.8
WOOD SHINGLE AND SHAKE INSTALLATION

ROOF ITEM

WOOD SHINGLES

WOOD SHAKES

1. Roof slope

2. Deck requirement

Temperate climate

In areas where the average daily
temperature in January is 25°F or less or
where there is a possibility of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water.

3. Interlayment

4. Underlayment

Temperate climate

In areas where there is a possibility of ice
forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water.

5. Application

Attachment

No. of fasteners

Exposure

Method

Flashing

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, °C = [(°F) - 32]/1.8.

Wood shingles shall be installed on slopes of
three units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(3:12) or greater.

Wood shakes shall be installed on slopes of
four units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(4:12) or greater.

Shingles shall be applied to roofs with solid
or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing
is used, sheathing boards shall not be less
than 1² ´ 4² nominal dimensions and shall be
spaced on center equal to the weather
exposure to coincide with the placement of
fasteners.

Shakes shall be applied to roofs with solid or
spaced sheathing.Where spaced sheathing is
used, sheathing boards shall not be less than
1² ´ 4² nominal dimensions and shall be
spaced on center equal to the weather
exposure to coincide with the placement of
fasteners. When 1² ´ 4² spaced sheathing is
installed at 10 inches, boards must be
installed between the sheathing boards.

Solid sheathing required.

Solid sheathing is required.

No requirements.

Interlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

An ice barrier that consists of at least two
layers of underlayment cemented together or
of a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen
sheet shall extend from the eave’s edge to a
point at least 24 inches inside the exterior
wall line of the building.

An ice barrier that consists of at least two
layers of underlayment cemented together or
of a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen
sheet shall extend from the lowest edges of all
roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches
inside the exterior wall line of the building.

Fasteners for wood shingles shall be hot-
dipped galvanized or Type 304 (Type 316 for
coastal areas) stainless steel with a minimum
penetration of 0.75 inch into the sheathing.
For sheathing less than 0.5 inch thick, the
fasteners shall extend through the sheathing.

Fasteners for wood shakes shall be hot-dipped
galvanized or Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal
areas) with a minimum penetration of 0.75
inch into the sheathing. For sheathing less
than 0.5 inch thick, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing.

Two per shingle.

Two per shake.

Weather exposures shall not exceed those set
forth in Table 1507.8.7.

Weather exposures shall not exceed those set
forth in Table 1507.9.8.

Shingles shall be laid with a side lap of not
less than 1.5 inches between joints in courses,
and no two joints in any three adjacent
courses shall be in direct alignment. Spacing
between shingles shall be 0.25 to 0.375 inch.

Shakes shall be laid with a side lap of not less
than 1.5 inches between joints in adjacent
courses. Spacing between shakes shall not be
less than 0.375 inch or more than 0.625 inch
for shakes and taper sawn shakes of naturally
durable wood and shall be 0.25 to 0.375 inch
for preservative-treated taper sawn shakes.

In accordance with Section 1507.8.8.

In accordance with Section 1507.9.9.

296

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009pg296.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:27:50 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1507.8.5 Material standards. Wood shingles shall be of
naturally durable wood and comply with the requirements
of Table 1507.8.5.

TABLE 1507.8.5
WOOD SHINGLE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL

APPLICABLE
MINIMUM GRADES GRADING RULES

Wood shingles of naturally
durable wood

1, 2 or 3

CSSB

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

1507.8.6 Attachment. Fasteners for wood shingles shall be
corrosion resistant with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch
(19.1 mm) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) in thickness, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing. Each shingle shall be attached with a
minimum of two fasteners.

1507.8.7 Application. Wood shingles shall be laid with a
side lap not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between joints in
adjacent courses, and not be in direct alignment in alternate
courses. Spacing between shingles shall be 1/4 to 3/8 inches
(6.4 to 9.5 mm). Weather exposure for wood shingles shall
not exceed that set in Table 1507.8.7.

TABLE 1507.8.7
WOOD SHINGLE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE

ROOFING MATERIAL

LENGTH
(inches)

GRADE

3:12 pitch
to < 4:12

4:12 pitch
or steeper

EXPOSURE (inches)

Shingles of naturally
durable wood

16

18

24

No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3

3.75
3.5
3
4.25
4
3.5
5.75
5.5
5

5
4
3.5
5.5
4.5
4
7.5
6.5
5.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1507.8.8 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof and vertical
surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch
(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solidly
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.9 Wood shakes. The installation of wood shakes shall
comply with the provisions of this section and Table 1507.8.
1507.9.1 Deck requirements. Wood shakes shall only be
used on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing
is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than 1-inch by
4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimensions and shall
be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure to coin-
cide with the placement of fasteners. Where 1-inch by
4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) spaced sheathing is installed at
10 inches (254 mm) o.c., additional 1-inch by 4-inch (25
mm by 102 mm) boards shall be installed between the
sheathing boards.
1507.9.1.1 Solid sheathing required. Solid sheathing is
required in areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of
water.
1507.9.2 Deck slope. Wood shakes shall only be used on
slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-per-
cent slope) or greater.
1507.9.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.9.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.9.5 Interlayment. Interlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

297

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.9.6 Material standards. Wood shakes shall comply
with the requirements of Table 1507.9.6.

TABLE 1507.9.6
WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL

Wood shakes of naturally durable wood
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable
wood
Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of
naturally durable wood
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and shingles
of naturally durable wood
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of
Southern pine treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Use Category 3B and Section 5.6)

MINIMUM
GRADES

APPLICABLE
GRADING
RULES

1

1 or 2

1

1

CSSB

CSSB

CSSB

CSSB

1 or 2

TFS

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau.
TFS = Forest Products Laboratory of the Texas Forest Services.

1507.9.7 Attachment. Fasteners for wood shakes shall be
corrosion resistant with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch
(19.1 mm) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) in thickness, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing. Each shake shall be attached with a
minimum of two fasteners.
1507.9.8 Application. Wood shakes shall be laid with a side
lap not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between joints in adja-
cent courses. Spacing between shakes in the same course
shall be 3/8 to 5/8 inches (9.5 to 15.9 mm) for shakes and taper
sawn shakes of naturally durable wood and shall be 1/4 to 3/8
inch (6.4 to 9.5 mm) for preservative taper sawn shakes.
Weather exposure for wood shakes shall not exceed those
set in Table 1507.9.8.

TABLE 1507.9.8
WOOD SHAKE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE

ROOFING MATERIAL

Shakes of naturally
durable wood

Preservative-treated taper
sawn shakes of Southern
yellow pine

Taper sawn shakes of
naturally durable wood

LENGTH
(inches)

GRADE

EXPOSURE
(inches)
4:12 PITCH
OR STEEPER

18
24

18
24

18
24

18
24

18
24

No. 1
No. 1

No. 1
No. 1

No. 2
No. 2

No. 1
No. 1

No. 2
No. 2

7.5
10a

7.5
10

5.5
7.5

7.5
10

5.5
7.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. For 24-inch by 0.375-inch handsplit shakes, the maximum exposure is 7.5
inches.

1507.9.9 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof and vertical
surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch

(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solidly
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.10 Built-up roofs. The installation of built-up roofs shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.10.1 Slope. Built-up roofs shall have a design slope of
a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal
(2-percent slope) for drainage, except for coal-tar built-up
roofs that shall have a design slope of a minimum
one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent
slope).
1507.10.2 Material standards. Built-up roof covering
materials shall comply with the standards in Table
1507.10.2.
1507.11 Modified bitumen roofing. The installation of modi-
fied bitumen roofing shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
1507.11.1 Slope. Modified bitumen membrane roofs shall
have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.
1507.11.2 Material standards. Modified bitumen roof
coverings shall comply with CGSB 37-GP-56M, ASTM D
6162, ASTM D 6163, ASTM D 6164, ASTM D 6222,
ASTM D 6223, ASTM D 6298 or ASTM D 6509.
1507.12 Thermoset single-ply roofing. The installation of
thermoset single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions
of this section.
1507.12.1 Slope. Thermoset single-ply membrane roofs
shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit
vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drain-
age.
1507.12.2 Material standards. Thermoset single-ply roof
coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4637, ASTM D 5019
or CGSB 37-GP-52M.
1507.12.3 Ballasted thermoset low-slope roofs. Ballasted
thermoset low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) shall be
installed in accordance with this section and Section 1504.4.
Stone used as ballast shall comply with ASTM D 448.

298

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1507.10.2
BUILT-UP ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL STANDARD

STANDARD

Acrylic coatings used in roofing

ASTM D 6083

Aggregate surfacing

ASTM D 1863

Asphalt adhesive used in roofing

ASTM D 3747

Asphalt cements used in roofing

ASTM D 3019; D 2822;
D 4586

Asphalt-coated glass fiber base sheet ASTM D 4601

Asphalt coatings used in roofing

ASTM D1227; D 2823;
D 4479

Asphalt glass felt

ASTM D 2178

Asphalt primer used in roofing

ASTM D 41

Asphalt-saturated and asphalt-coated
organic felt base sheet

ASTM D 2626

Asphalt-saturated organic felt
(perforated)

Asphalt used in roofing

ASTM D 226

ASTM D 312

Coal-tar cements used in roofing

ASTM D 4022; D 5643

Coal-tar saturated organic felt

ASTM D 227

Coal-tar pitch used in roofing

ASTM D 450; Type I or II

Coal-tar primer used in roofing,
dampproofing and waterproofing

Glass mat, coal tar

Glass mat, venting type

ASTM D 43

ASTM D 4990

ASTM D 4897

Mineral-surfaced inorganic cap sheet ASTM D 3909

Thermoplastic fabrics used in
roofing

ASTM D 5665, D 5726

1507.13 Thermoplastic single-ply roofing. The installation
of thermoplastic single-ply roofing shall comply with the pro-
visions of this section.

1507.13.1 Slope. Thermoplastic single-ply membrane
roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth
unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

1507.13.2 Material standards. Thermoplastic single-ply
roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4434, ASTM D
6754, ASTM D 6878 or CGSB CAN/CGSB 37-54.

1507.13.3 Ballasted thermoplastic low-slope roofs. Bal-
lasted thermoplastic low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12)
shall be installed in accordance with this section and Section
1504.4. Stone used as ballast shall comply with ASTM
D448.

1507.14 Sprayed polyurethane foam roofing. The installa-
tion of sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall comply with
the provisions of this section.

1507.14.1 Slope. Sprayed polyurethane foam roofs shall
have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.14.2 Material standards. Spray-applied polyure-
thane foam insulation shall comply with Type III or IV as
defined in ASTM C 1029.
1507.14.3 Application. Foamed-in-place roof insulation
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. A liquid-applied protective coating that com-
plies with Section 1507.15 shall be applied no less than 2
hours nor more than 72 hours following the application of
the foam.
1507.14.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastic materials and instal-
lation shall comply with Chapter 26.
1507.15 Liquid-applied coatings. The installation of liq-
uid-applied coatings shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
1507.15.1 Slope. Liquid-applied roofs shall have a design
slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units
horizontal (2-percent slope).
1507.15.2 Material standards. Liquid-applied roof coat-
ings shall comply with ASTM C 836, ASTM C 957, ASTM
D 1227 or ASTM D 3468, ASTM D 6083, ASTM D 6694 or
ASTM D 6947.
1507.16 Roof gardens and landscaped roofs. Roof gardens
and landscaped roofs shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter and Sections 1607.11.2.2 and 1607.11.3.

SECTION 1508
ROOF INSULATION

1508.1 General. The use of above-deck thermal insulation
shall be permitted provided such insulation is covered with an
approved roof covering and passes the tests of FM 4450 or UL
1256 when tested as an assembly.
Exceptions:
1. Foam plastic roof insulation shall conform to the
material and installation requirements of Chapter 26.
2. W h e r e a c o n c r e t e r o o f d e c k i s u s e d a n d th e
above-deck thermal insulation is covered with an
approved roof covering.
1508.1.1 Cellulosic fiberboard. Cellulosic fiberboard roof
insulation shall conform to the material and installation
requirements of Chapter 23.
1508.2 Material standards. Above-deck thermal insulation
board shall comply with the standards in Table 1508.2.

TABLE 1508.2
MATERIAL STANDARDS FOR ROOF INSULATION

Cellular glass board

ASTM C 552

Composite boards

ASTM C 1289, Type III, IV, V or VI

Expanded polystyrene

ASTM C 578

Extruded polystyrene board ASTM C 578

Perlite board

ASTM C 728

Polyisocyanurate board

ASTM C 1289, Type I or Type II

Wood fiberboard

ASTM C 208

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

299

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

SECTION 1509
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1509.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
construction of rooftop structures.
1509.2 Penthouses. A penthouse or penthouses in compliance
with Sections 1509.2.1 through 1509.2.4 shall be considered as
a portion of the story below.
1509.2.1 Height above roof. A penthouse or other projec-
tion above the roof in structures of other than Type I con-
struction shall not exceed 28 feet (8534 mm) above the roof
where used as an enclosure for tanks or for elevators that run
to the roof and in all other cases shall not extend more than
18 feet (5486 mm) above the roof.
1509.2.2 Area limitation. The aggregate area of pent-
houses and other rooftop structures shall not exceed
one-third the area of the supporting roof. Such penthouses
shall not contribute to either the building area or number of
stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the
penthouse shall not be included in determining the fire area
defined in Section 902.
1509.2.3 Use limitations. A penthouse, bulkhead or any
other similar projection above the roof shall not be used for
purposes other than shelter of mechanical equipment or
shelter of vertical shaft openings in the roof. Provisions such
as louvers, louver blades or flashing shall be made to protect
the mechanical equipment and the building interior from the
elements. Penthouses or bulkheads used for purposes other
than permitted by this section shall conform to the require-
ments of this code for an additional story. The restrictions of
this section shall not prohibit the placing of wood flagpoles
or similar structures on the roof of any building.
1509.2.4 Type of construction. Penthouses shall be con-
structed with walls, floors and roof as required for the build-
ing.
Exceptions:
1. On buildings of Type I construction, the exterior
walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separa-
tion distance of more than 5 feet (1524 mm) and
less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be of at least
1-hour fire resistance-rated noncombustible con-
struction. Walls and roofs with a fire separation
distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall be of
noncombustible construction. Interior framing
and walls shall be of noncombustible construction.
2. On buildings of Type I construction two stories
above grade plane or less in height and Type II
construction, the exterior walls and roofs of pent-
houses with a fire separation distance of more than
5 feet (1524 mm) and less than 20 feet (6096 mm)
shall be of at least 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
noncombustible or fire-retardant-treated wood
construction. Walls and roofs with a fire separa-
tion distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall
be of noncombustible or fire-retardant-treated
wood construction. Interior framing and walls

shall be of noncombustible or fire retardant-
treated wood construction.
3. On buildings of Type III, IV and V construction,
the exterior walls of penthouses with a fire separa-
tion distance of more than 5 feet (1524 mm) and
less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be at least 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction. Walls with a
fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or
greater from a common property line shall be of
Type IV construction or noncombustible, or
fire-retardant-treated wood construction. Roofs
shall be constructed of materials and fire-resis-
tance rated as required in Table 601 and Section
603, Item 25.3. Interior framing and walls shall be
Type IV cons truc t ion o r noncombus t ib le o r
fire-retardant-treated wood construction.
4. On buildings of Type I construction, unprotected
noncombustible enclosures housing only mechan-
ical equipment and located with a minimum fire
separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be
permitted.
5. On buildings of Type I construction two stories or
less above grade plane in height, or Type II, III, IV
and V construction, unprotected noncombustible
or fire-retardant-treated wood enclosures housing
only mechanical equipment and located with a
minimum fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096
mm) shall be permitted.
6. On one-story buildings, combustible unroofed
mechanical equipment screens, fences or similar
enclosures are permitted where located with a fire
separation distance of at least 20 feet (6096 mm)
from ad jacen t proper ty l ines and where no t
exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) in height above the
roof surface.
7. Dormers shall be of the same type of construction
as the roof on which they are placed, or of the exte-
rior walls of the building.
1509.3 Tanks. Tanks having a capacity of more than 500 gal-
lons (2 m3) placed in or on a building shall be supported on
masonry, reinforced concrete, steel or Type IV construction
provided that, where such supports are located in the building
above the lowest story, the support shall be fire-resistance rated
as required for Type IA construction.
1509.3.1 Valve. Such tanks shall have in the bottom or on
the side near the bottom, a pipe or outlet, fitted with a suit-
able quick opening valve for discharging the contents in an
emergency through an adequate drain.
1509.3.2 Location. Such tanks shall not be placed over or
near a line of stairs or an elevator shaft, unless there is a solid
roof or floor underneath the tank.
1509.3.3 Tank cover. Unenclosed roof tanks shall have cov-
ers sloping toward the outer edges.
1509.4 Cooling towers. Cooling towers in excess of 250
square feet (23.2 m2) in base area or in excess of 15 feet (4572

300

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

14

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

of roof coverings down to the roof deck where any of the fol-
lowing conditions occur:
1. Where the existing roof or roof covering is water soaked
or has deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or
roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional
roofing.
2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate,
clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. Where the existing roof has two or more applications of
any type of roof covering.
Exceptions:
1. Complete and separate roofing systems, such as
standing-seam metal roof systems, that are designed
to transmit the roof loads directly to the building’s
structural system and that do not rely on existing roofs
and roof coverings for support, shall not require the
removal of existing roof coverings.
2. Metal panel, metal shingle and concrete and clay tile
roof coverings shall be permitted to be installed over
existing wood shake roofs when applied in accor-
dance with Section 1510.4.
3. The application of a new protective coating over an
existing spray polyurethane foam roofing system
shall be permitted without tear-off of existing roof
coverings.
1510.4 Roof recovering. Where the application of a new roof
covering over wood shingle or shake roofs creates a combusti-
ble concealed space, the entire existing surface shall be covered
with gypsum board, mineral fiber, glass fiber or other approved
materials securely fastened in place.
1510.5 Reinstallation of materials. Existing slate, clay or
cement tile shall be permitted for reinstallation, except that
damaged, cracked or broken slate or tile shall not be reinstalled.
Existing vent flashing, metal edgings, drain outlets, collars and
metal counterflashings shall not be reinstalled where rusted,
damaged or deteriorated. Aggregate surfacing materials shall
not be reinstalled.
1510.6 Flashings. Flashings shall be reconstructed in accor-
dance with approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Metal flashing to which bituminous materials are to be adhered
shall be primed prior to installation.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

mm) high where located on building roofs more than 50 feet
(15 240 mm) high shall be of noncombustible construction.
Cooling towers shall not exceed one-third of the supporting
roof area.
Exception: Drip boards and the enclosing construction of
wood not less than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, pro-
vided the wood is covered on the exterior of the tower with
noncombustible material.
1509.5 Towers, spires, domes and cupolas. Any tower, spire,
dome or cupola shall be of a type of construction not less in
fire-resistance rating than required for the building to which it
is attached, except that any such tower, spire, dome or cupola
that exceeds 85 feet (25 908 mm) in height above grade plane,
exceeds 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in horizontal area or is used
for any purpose other than a belfry or an architectural embel-
lishment shall be constructed of and supported on Type I or II
construction.
1509.5.1 Noncombustible construction required. Any
tower, spire, dome or cupola that exceeds 60 feet (18 288
mm) in height above the highest point at which it comes in
contact with the roof, or that exceeds 200 square feet (18.6
m2) in area at any horizontal section, or which is intended to
be used for any purpose other than a belfry or architectural
embellishment, shall be entirely constructed of and sup-
ported by noncombustible materials. Such structures shall
be separated from the building below by construction hav-
ing a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5 hours with
openings protected with a minimum 1.5-hour fire protection
rating. Structures, except aerial supports 12 feet (3658 mm)
high or less, flagpoles, water tanks and cooling towers,
placed above the roof of any building more than 50 feet (15
240 mm) in building height, shall be of noncombustible
material and shall be supported by construction of
noncombustible material.
1509.5.2 Towers and spires. Towers and spires where
enclosed shall have exterior walls as required for the build-
ing to which they are attached. The roof covering of spires
shall be of a class of roof covering as required for the main
roof of the rest of the structure.

SECTION 1510
REROOFING

1510.1 General. Materials and methods of application used for
recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 15.
Exception: Reroofing shall not be required to meet the min-
imum design slope requirement of one-quarter unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in Section 1507 for
roofs that provide positive roof drainage.
1510.2 Structural and construction loads. Structural roof
components shall be capable of supporting the roof-covering
system and the material and equipment loads that will be
encountered during installation of the system.
1510.3 Recovering versus replacement. New roof coverings
shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

301

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

302

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 16

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

➡

SECTION 1601
GENERAL

1601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
structural design of buildings, structures and portions thereof
regulated by this code.

SECTION 1602
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

1602.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. A method of proportion-
ing structural members, such that elastically computed stresses
produced in the members by nominal loads do not exceed spec-
ified allowable stresses (also called “working stress design”).
DEAD LOADS. The weight of materials of construction
incorporated into the building, including but not limited to
walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, fin-
ishes, cladding and other similarly incorporated architectural
and structural items, and the weight of fixed service equipment,
such as cranes, plumbing stacks and risers, electrical feeders,
h e a t ing , ven t i l a t ing and a i r- cond i t ion ing sy s t em s and
automatic sprinkler systems.
DESIGN STRENGTH. The product of the nominal strength
and a resistance factor (or strength reduction factor).
DIAPHRAGM. A horizontal or sloped system acting to trans-
mit lateral forces to the vertical-resisting elements. When the
term “diaphragm” is used, it shall include horizontal bracing
systems.
Diaphragm, blocked. In light-frame construction, a dia-
phragm in which all sheathing edges not occurring on a
framing member are supported on and fastened to blocking.
Diaphragm boundary. In light-frame construction, a loca-
tion where shear is transferred into or out of the diaphragm
sheathing. Transfer is either to a boundary element or to
another force-resisting element.
Diaphragm chord. A diaphragm boundary element per-
pendicular to the applied load that is assumed to take axial
stresses due to the diaphragm moment.
Diaphragm flexible. A diaphragm is flexible for the pur-
pose of distribution of story shear and torsional moment
where so indicated in Section 12.3.1 of ASCE 7, as modified
in Section 1613.6.1.
Diaphragm, rigid. A diaphragm is rigid for the purpose of
distribution of story shear and torsional moment when the
lateral deformation of the diaphragm is less than or equal to
two times the average story drift.
DURATION OF LOAD. The period of continuous applica-
tion of a given load, or the aggregate of periods of intermittent
applications of the same load.

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. Buildings and other structures
that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme
environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes.
FABRIC PARTITION. A partition consisting of a finished
surface made of fabric, without a continuous rigid backing, that
is directly attached to a framing system in which the vertical
framing members are spaced greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) on
center.
FACTORED LOAD. The product of a nominal load and a load
factor.
GUARD. See Section 1002.1.
IMPACT LOAD. The load resulting from moving machinery,
elevators, craneways, vehicles and other similar forces and
kinetic loads, pressure and possible surcharge from fixed or
moving loads.
LIMIT STATE. A condition beyond which a structure or
member becomes unfit for service and is judged to be no longer
useful for its intended function (serviceability limit state) or to
be unsafe (strength limit state).
LIVE LOADS. Those loads produced by the use and occu-
pancy of the building or other structure and do not include con-
struction or environmental loads such as wind load, snow load,
rain load, earthquake load, flood load or dead load.
LIVE LOADS (ROOF). Those loads produced (1) during
maintenance by workers, equipment and materials; and (2)
during the life of the structure by movable objects such as
planters and by people.
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD). A
method of proportioning structural members and their connec-
tions using load and resistance factors such that no applicable
limit state is reached when the structure is subjected to appro-
priate load combinations. The term “LRFD” is used in the
design of steel and wood structures.
LOAD EFFECTS. Forces and deformations produced in
structural members by the applied loads.
LOAD FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the
actual load from the nominal load, for uncertainties in the anal-
ysis that transforms the load into a load effect, and for the prob-
a b i l i t y t h a t m o r e t h a n o n e ex t r em e l o a d w i l l o c c u r
simultaneously.
LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of
building materials, occupants and their possessions, environ-
mental effects, differential movement and restrained dimen-
sional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in which
variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as
dead loads. All other loads are variable loads (see also “Nomi-
nal loads”).
NOMINAL LOADS. The magnitudes of the loads specified in
this chapter (dead, live, soil, wind, snow, rain, flood and earth-
quake).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

303

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:30 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

OCCUPANCY CATEGORY. A category used to determine
structural requirements based on occupancy.
OTHER STRUCTURES. Structures, other than buildings,
for which loads are specified in this chapter.
PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). The section of a floor,
wall or roof comprised between the supporting frame of two
adjacent rows of columns and girders or column bands of floor
or roof construction.
RESISTANCE FACTOR. A factor that accounts for devia-
tions of the actual strength from the nominal strength and the
manner and consequences of failure (also called “strength
reduction factor”).
STRENGTH, NOMINAL. The capacity of a structure or
member to resist the effects of loads, as determined by compu-
tations using specified material strengths and dimensions and
equations derived from accepted principles of structural
mechanics or by field tests or laboratory tests of scaled models,
allowing for modeling effects and differences between labora-
tory and field conditions.
STRENGTH, REQUIRED. Strength of a member, cross sec-
tion or connection required to resist factored loads or related
internal moments and forces in such combinations as stipulated
by these provisions.
STRENGTH DESIGN. A method of proportioning structural
members such that the computed forces produced in the mem-
bers by factored loads do not exceed the member design
strength [also called “load and resistance factor design”
(LRFD)]. The term “strength design” is used in the design of
concrete and masonry structural elements.
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEM. A system of building com-
ponents near open sides of a garage floor or ramp or building
walls that act as restraints for vehicles.
NOTATIONS.
D = Dead load.
E = C om b i n e d e f f e c t o f h o r i z o n t a l a n d v e r t i c a l
earthquake induced forces as defined in Section
12.4.2 of ASCE 7.
F = Load due to fluids with well-defined pressures and
maximum heights.
Fa = Flood load in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7.
H = Load due to lateral earth pressures, ground water
pressure or pressure of bulk materials.
L = Live load, except roof live load, including any per-
mitted live load reduction.
Lr = Roof live load including any permitted live load
reduction.
R = Rain load.
S = Snow load.
T = Self-straining force arising from contraction or
expansion resu lting from temperature change,
shrinkage, moisture change, creep in component

➡

materials, movement due to differential settlement
or combinations thereof.
W = Load due to wind pressure.

SECTION 1603
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

1603.1 General. Construction documents shall show the size,
section and relative locations of structural members with floor
levels, column centers and offsets dimensioned. The design
loads and other information pertinent to the structural design
required by Sections 1603.1.1 through 1603.1.9 shall be indi-
cated on the construction documents.
Exception: Construction documents for buildings con-
structed in accordance with the conventional light-frame
construction provisions of Section 2308 shall indicate the
following structural design information:
1. Floor and roof live loads.
2. Ground snow load, Pg.
3. Basic wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour
(mph) (km/hr) and wind exposure.
4. Seismic design category and site class.
5. Flood design data, if located in flood hazard areas
established in Section 1612.3.
6. Design load-bearing values of soils.
1603.1.1 Floor live load. The uniformly distributed, con-
centrated and impact floor live load used in the design shall
be indicated for floor areas. Use of live load reduction in
accordance with Section 1607.9 shall be indicated for each
type of live load used in the design.
1603.1.2 Roof live load. The roof live load used in the
design shall be indicated for roof areas (Section 1607.11).
1603.1.3 Roof snow load. The ground snow load, Pg, shall
be indicated. In areas where the ground snow load, Pg,
exceeds 10 pounds per square foot (psf) (0.479 kN/m2), the
following additional information shall also be provided,
regardless of whether snow loads govern the design of the
roof:
1. Flat-roof snow load, Pf.
2. Snow exposure factor, Ce.
3. Snow load importance factor, I.
4. Thermal factor, Ct.
1603.1.4 Wind design data. The following information
related to wind loads shall be shown, regardless of whether
wind loads govern the design of the lateral-force-resisting
system of the building:
1. Basic wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour
(km/hr).
2. Wind importance factor, I, and occupancy category.
3. Wind exposure. Where more than one wind exposure
is utilized, the wind exposure and applicable wind
direction shall be indicated.

304

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:30 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

4. The applicable internal pressure coefficient.
5. Components and cladding. The design wind pres-
sures in terms of psf (kN/m2) to be used for the design
of exterior component and cladding materials not spe-
cifically designed by the registered design profes-
sional.

1603.1.5 Earthquake design data. The following informa-
tion related to seismic loads shall be shown, regardless of
whether seismic loads govern the design of the lat-
eral-force-resisting system of the building:
1. Seismic importance factor, I, and occupancy cate-
gory.
2. Mapped spectral response accelerations, SS and S1.
3. Site class.
4. Spectral response coefficients, SDS and SD1.
5. Seismic design category.
6. Basic seismic-force-resisting system(s).
7. Design base shear.
8. Seismic response coefficient(s), CS.
9. Response modification factor(s), R.
10. Analysis procedure used.
1603.1.6 Geotechnical information. The design load-
bearing values of soils shall be shown on the construction
documents.
1603.1.7 Flood design data. For buildings located in whole
or in part in flood hazard areas as established in Section
1612.3, the documentation pertaining to design, if required
in Section 1612.5, shall be included and the following infor-
mation, referenced to the datum on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), shall be shown, regardless of
whether flood loads govern the design of the building:
1. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity
wave action, the elevation of the proposed lowest
floor, including the basement.
2. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity
wave action, the elevation to which any nonresiden-
tial building will be dry floodproofed.
3. In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action, the proposed elevation of the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest
floor, including the basement.
1603.1.8 Special loads. Special loads that are applicable to
the design of the building, structure or portions thereof shall
be indicated along with the specified section of this code
that addresses the special loading condition.
1603.1.9 Systems and components requiring special
inspections for seismic resistance. Construction docu-
ments or specifications shall be prepared for those systems
and components requiring special inspection for seismic
resistance as specified in Section 1707.1 by the registered
design professional responsible for their design and shall be
submitted for approval in accordance with Section 107.1.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

Reference to seismic standards in lieu of detailed drawings
is acceptable.

➡

SECTION 1604
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

1604.1 General. Building, structures and parts thereof shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with strength design,
load and resistance factor design, allowable stress design,
empirical design or conventional construction methods, as per-
mitted by the applicable material chapters.
1604.2 Strength. Buildings and other structures, and parts
thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the
factored loads in load combinations defined in this code with-
out exceeding the appropriate strength limit states for the mate-
rials of construction. Alternatively, buildings and other
structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed
to support safely the nominal loads in load combinations
defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate speci-
fied allowable stresses for the materials of construction.
Loads and forces for occupancies or uses not covered in this
chapter shall be subject to the approval of the building official.
1604.3 Serviceability. Structural systems and members
thereof shall be designed to have adequate stiffness to limit
deflections and lateral drift. See Section 12.12.1 of ASCE 7 for
drift limits applicable to earthquake loading.
1604.3.1 Deflections. The deflections of structural mem-
bers shall not exceed the more restrictive of the limitations
of Sections 1604.3.2 through 1604.3.5 or that permitted by
Table 1604.3.

TABLE 1604.3
DEFLECTION LIMITSa, b, c, h, i

CONSTRUCTION

L

S or W f D + Ld, g

Roof members:e
Supporting plaster ceiling
Supporting nonplaster ceiling
Not supporting ceiling

Floor members

Exterior walls and interior partitions:
With brittle finishes
With flexible finishes

Farm buildings

Greenhouses

l/360
l/240
l/180

l/360

—
—

—

—

l/360
l/240
l/180

—

l/240
l/120

—

—

l/240
l/180
l/120

l/240

—
—

l/180

l/120

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. For structural roofing and siding made of formed metal sheets, the total load
deflection shall not exceed l/60. For secondary roof structural members sup-
porting formed metal roofing, the live load deflection shall not exceed l/150.
For secondary wall members supporting formed metal siding, the design
wind load deflection shall not exceed l/90. For roofs, this exception only
applies when the metal sheets have no roof covering.
b. Interior partitions not exceeding 6 feet in height and flexible, folding and
portable partitions are not governed by the provisions of this section. The
deflection criterion for interior partitions is based on the horizontal load
defined in Section 1607.13.
c. See Section 2403 for glass supports.

(Table notes continued)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

305

16_ibc_2009pg305.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:33:15 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

d. For wood structural members having a moisture content of less than 16 per-
cent at time of installation and used under dry conditions, the deflection
resulting from L + 0.5D is permitted to be substituted for the deflection
resulting from L + D.
e. The above deflections do not ensure against ponding. Roofs that do not have
sufficient slope or camber to assure adequate drainage shall be investigated
for ponding. See Section 1611 for rain and ponding requirements and Sec-
tion 1503.4 for roof drainage requirements.
f. The wind load is permitted to be taken as 0.7 times the “component and clad-
ding” loads for the purpose of determining deflection limits herein.
g. For steel structural members, the dead load shall be taken as zero.
h. For aluminum structural members or aluminum panels used in skylights and
sloped glazing framing, roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers,
not supporting edge of glass or aluminum sandwich panels, the total load
deflection shall not exceed l/60. For continuous aluminum structural mem-
bers supporting edge of glass, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/175
for each glass lite or l/60 for the entire length of the member, whichever is
more stringent. For aluminum sandwich panels used in roofs or walls of sun-
room additions or patio covers, the total load deflection shall not exceed
l/120.
i. For cantilever members, l shall be taken as twice the length of the cantilever.

1604.3.2 Reinforced concrete. The deflection of rein-
forced concrete structural members shall not exceed that
permitted by ACI 318.
1604.3.3 Steel. The deflection of steel structural members
shall not exceed that permitted by AISC 360, AISI S100,
ASCE 3, ASCE 8, SJI CJ-1.0, SJI JG-1.1, SJI K-1.1 or SJI
LH/DLH-1.1, as applicable.
1604.3.4 Masonry. The deflection of masonry structural
members shall not exceed that permitted by TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
1604.3.5 Aluminum. The deflection of aluminum struc-
tural members shall not exceed that permitted by AA
ADM1.
1604.3.6 Limits. Deflection of structural members over
span, l, shall not exceed that permitted by Table 1604.3.
1604.4 Analysis. Load effects on structural members and their
connections shall be determined by methods of structural anal-
ysis that take into account equilibrium, general stability, geo-
metric compatibility and both short- and long-term material
properties.
Members that tend to accumulate residual deformations
under repeated service loads shall have included in their analy-
sis the added eccentricities expected to occur during their ser-
vice life.
Any system or method of construction to be used shall be
based on a rational analysis in accordance with well-estab-
lished principles of mechanics. Such analysis shall result in a
system that provides a complete load path capable of transfer-
ring loads from their point of origin to the load-resisting ele-
ments.
The total lateral force shall be distributed to the various verti-
cal elements of the lateral-force-resisting system in proportion
to their rigidities, considering the rigidity of the horizontal
bracing system or diaphragm. Rigid elements assumed not to
be a part of the lateral-force-resisting system are permitted to
be incorporated into buildings provided their effect on the
action of the system is considered and provided for in the
design. Except where diaphragms are flexible, or are permitted
to be analyzed as flexible, provisions shall be made for the
increased forces induced on resisting elements of the structural

system resulting from torsion due to eccentricity between the
center of application of the lateral forces and the center of rigid-
ity of the lateral-force-resisting system.
Every structure shall be designed to resist the overturning
effects caused by the lateral forces specified in this chapter. See
Section 1609 for wind loads, Section 1610 for lateral soil loads
and Section 1613 for earthquake loads.
1604.5 Occupancy category. Each building and structure
shall be assigned an occupancy category in accordance with
Table 1604.5.
1604.5.1 Multiple occupancies. Where a building or struc-
ture is occupied by two or more occupancies not included in
the same occupancy category, it shall be assigned the classi-
fication of the highest occupancy category corresponding to
the various occupancies. Where buildings or structures have
two or more portions that are structurally separated, each
portion shall be separately classified. Where a separated
portion of a building or structure provides required access
to, required egress from or shares life safety components
with another portion having a higher occupancy category,
both portions shall be assigned to the higher occupancy cat-
egory.
1604.6 In-situ load tests. The building official is authorized to
require an engineering analysis or a load test, or both, of any
construction whenever there is reason to question the safety of
the construction for the intended occupancy. Engineering anal-
ysis and load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Sec-
tion 1714.
1604.7 Preconstruction load tests. Materials and methods of
construction that are not capable of being designed by
approved engineering analysis or that do not comply with the
applicable material design standards listed in Chapter 35, or
alternative test procedures in accordance with Section 1712,
shall be load tested in accordance with Section 1715.
1604.8 Anchorage.
1604.8.1 General. Anchorage of the roof to walls and col-
umns, and of walls and columns to foundations, shall be
provided to resist the uplift and sliding forces that result
from the application of the prescribed loads.
1604.8.2 Walls. Walls shall be anchored to floors, roofs and
other structural elements that provide lateral support for the
wall. Such anchorage shall provide a positive direct connec-
tion capable of resisting the horizontal forces specified in
this chapter but not less than the minimum strength design
horizontal force specified in Section 11.7.3 of ASCE 7, sub-
stituted for “E” in the load combinations of Section 1605.2
or 1605.3. Concrete and masonry walls shall be designed to
resist bending between anchors where the anchor spacing
exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm). Required anchors in masonry
walls of hollow units or cavity walls shall be embedded in a
reinforced grouted structural element of the wall. See Sec-
tions 1609 for wind design requirements and 1613 for earth-
quake design requirements.
1604.8.3 Decks. Where supported by attachment to an exte-
rior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary
structure and designed for both vertical and lateral loads as
applicable. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by

306

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg306.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:56:59 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where
positive connection to the primary building structure cannot
be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-support-
ing. Connections of decks with cantilevered framing mem-
bers to exterior walls or other framing members shall be
designed for both of the following:

1. The reactions resulting from the dead load and live
load specified in Table 1607.1, or the snow load spec-
ified in Section 1608, in accordance with Section
1605, acting on all portions of the deck.
2. The reactions resulting from the dead load and live
load specified in Table 1607.1, or the snow load spec-
ified in Section 1608, in accordance with Section
1605, acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck,

and no live load or snow load on the remaining por-
tion of the deck.
1604.9 Counteracting structural actions. Structural mem-
bers, systems, components and cladding shall be designed to
resist forces due to earthquake and wind, with consideration of
overturning, sliding and uplift. Continuous load paths shall be
provided for transmitting these forces to the foundation. Where
sliding is used to isolate the elements, the effects of friction
between sliding elements shall be included as a force.
1604.10 Wind and seismic detailing. Lateral-force-resisting
systems shall meet seismic detailing requirements and limita-
tions prescribed in this code and ASCE 7, excluding Chapter
14 and Appendix 11A, even when wind load effects are greater
than seismic load effects.

TABLE 1604.5
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

OCCUPANCY
CATEGORY

NATURE OF OCCUPANCY

I

II

III

IV

Buildings and other structures that represent a low hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:
(cid:129) Agricultural facilities.
(cid:129) Certain temporary facilities.
(cid:129) Minor storage facilities.

Buildings and other structures except those listed in Occupancy Categories I, III and IV

Buildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not
limited to:
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures whose primary occupancy is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures containing elementary school, secondary school or day care facilities with an occupant
load greater than 250.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures containing adult education facilities, such as colleges and universities with an occupant
load greater than 500.
(cid:129) Group I-2 occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or more resident patients but not having surgery or emergency
treatment facilities.
(cid:129) Group I-3 occupancies.
(cid:129) Any other occupancy with an occupant load greater than 5,000a.
(cid:129) Power-generating stations, water treatment facilities for potable water, waste water treatment facilities and other pub-
lic utility facilities not included in Occupancy Category IV.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures not included in Occupancy Category IV containing sufficient quantities of toxic or ex-
plosive substances to be dangerous to the public if released.

Buildings and other structures designated as essential facilities, including but not limited to:
(cid:129) Group I-2 occupancies having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.
(cid:129) Fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations and emergency vehicle garages.
(cid:129) Designated earthquake, hurricane or other emergency shelters.
(cid:129) Designated emergency preparedness, communications and operations centers and other facilities required for emer-
gency response.
(cid:129) Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as emergency backup facilities for Occupancy
Category IV structures.
(cid:129) Structures containing highly toxic materials as defined by Section 307 where the quantity of the material exceeds the
maximum allowable quantities of Table 307.1(2).
(cid:129) Aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency aircraft hangars.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures having critical national defense functions.
(cid:129) Water storage facilities and pump structures required to maintain water pressure for fire suppression.

a. For purposes of occupant load calculation, occupancies required by Table 1004.1.1 to use gross floor area calculations shall be permitted to use net floor areas to
determine the total occupant load.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

307

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:32 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

SECTION 1605
LOAD COMBINATIONS

1605.1 General. Buildings and other structures and portions
thereof shall be designed to resist:
1. The load combinations specified in Section 1605.2,
1605.3.1 or 1605.3.2,
2. The load combinations specified in Chapters 18 through
23, and
3. The load combinations with overstrength factor speci-
fied in Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7 where required by
Section 12.2.5.2, 12.3.3.3 or 12.10.2.1 of ASCE 7. With
the simplified procedure of ASCE 7 Section 12.14, the
load combinations with overstrength factor of Section
12.14.3.2 or ASCE 7 shall be used.
Applicable loads shall be considered, including both earth-
quake and wind, in accordance with the specified load combi-
nations. Each load combination shall also be investigated with
one or more of the variable loads set to zero.
Where the load combinations with overstrength factor in
Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7 apply, they shall be used as fol-
lows:
1. The bas ic comb ina t ions fo r s t reng th des ign w i th
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-5 and 16-7 in
Section 1605.2.1.
2. The basic combinations for allowable stress design with
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-12, 16-13 and
16-15 in Section 1605.3.1.
3. The basic combinations for allowable stress design with
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-20 and 16-21
in Section 1605.3.2.
1605.1.1 Stability. Regardless of which load combinations
are used to design for strength, where overall structure sta-
bility (such as stability against overturning, sliding, or buoy-
ancy) is being verified, use of the load combinations
specified in Section 1605.2 or 1605.3 shall be permitted.
Where the load combinations specified in Section 1605.2
are used, strength reduction factors applicable to soil resis-
tance shall be provided by a registered design professional.
The stability of retaining walls shall be verified in accor-
dance with Section 1807.2.3.
1605.2 Load combinations using strength design or load
and resistance factor design.
1605.2.1 Basic load combinations. Where strength design

or load and resistance factor design is used, structures and
portions thereof shall resist the most critical effects from the
following combinations of factored loads:

1.4(D + F)

1.2(D + F + T) + 1.6(L + H) +
0.5(Lr or S or R)

(Equation 16-1)

(Equation 16-2)

1.2D + 1.6(Lr or S or R) + (f1L or 0.8W)

(Equation 16-3)

1.2D + 1.6W + f1L + 0.5(Lr or S or R)

1.2D + 1.0E + f1L + f2S

(Equation 16-4)

(Equation 16-5)

308

0.9D + 1.6W + 1.6H

0.9D + 1.0E + 1.6H

(Equation 16-6)

(Equation 16-7)

where:
f1 = 1 for floors in places of public assembly, for live loads
in excess of 100 pounds per square foot (4.79 kN/m2),
and for parking garage live load, and
= 0.5 for other live loads.
f2 = 0.7 for roof configurations (such as saw tooth) that do
not shed snow off the structure, and
= 0.2 for other roof configurations.
Exception: Where other factored load combinations are
specifically required by the provisions of this code, such
combinations shall take precedence.
1605.2.2 Flood loads. Where flood loads, Fa, are to be con-
sidered in the design, the load combinations of Section 2.3.3
of ASCE 7 shall be used.
1605.3 Load combinations using allowable stress design.
1605.3.1 Basic load combinations. Where allowable stress
design (working stress design), as permitted by this code, is
used, structures and portions thereof shall resist the most
critical effects resulting from the following combinations of
loads:

D + F

D + H + F + L + T

D + H + F + (Lr or S or R)
D + H + F + 0.75(L + T) +
0.75(Lr or S or R)
D + H + F + (W or 0.7E)

D + H + F + 0.75(W or 0.7E) +
0.75L + 0.75(Lr or S or R)
0.6D + W + H

0.6D + 0.7E + H

(Equation 16-8)

(Equation 16-9)

(Equation 16-10)

(Equation 16-11)

(Equation 16-12)

(Equation 16-13)

(Equation 16-14)

(Equation 16-15)

Exceptions:
1. Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof
live load or with more than three-fourths of the
snow load or one-half of the wind load.
2. Flat roof snow loads of 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2) or less
and roof live loads of 30 psf or less need not be
combined with seismic loads. Where flat roof
snow loads exceed 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2), 20 percent
shall be combined with seismic loads.
1605.3.1.1 Stress increases. Increases in allowable
stresses specified in the appropriate material chapter or
the referenced standards shall not be used with the load
combinations of Section 1605.3.1, except that increases
shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 23.
1605.3.1.2 Flood loads. Where flood loads, Fa, are to be
considered in design, the load combinations of Section
2.4.2 of ASCE 7 shall be used.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:32 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1605.3.2 Alternative basic load combinations. In lieu of the
basic load combinations specified in Section 1605.3.1, struc-
tures and portions thereof shall be permitted to be designed for
the most critical effects resulting from the following combina-
tions. When using these alternative basic load combinations
that include wind or seismic loads, allowable stresses are per-
mitted to be increased or load combinations reduced where
permitted by the material chapter of this code or the referenced
standards. For load combinations that include the counteract-
ing effects of dead and wind loads, only two-thirds of the mini-
mum dead load likely to be in place during a design wind event
shall be used. Where wind loads are calculated in accordance
with Chapter 6 of ASCE 7, the coefficient w in the following
equations shall be taken as 1.3. For other wind loads, w shall be
taken as 1. When using these alternative load combinations to
evaluate sliding, overturning and soil bearing at the soil-struc-
ture interface, the reduction of foundation overturning from
Section 12.13.4 in ASCE 7 shall not be used. When using these
alternative basic load combinations for proportioning founda-
tions for loadings, which include seismic loads, the vertical
seismic load effect, Ev, in Equation 12.4-4 of ASCE 7 is permit-
ted to be taken equal to zero.

D + L + (Lr or S or R)
D + L + (wW)

D + L + wW + S/2

D + L + S + wW/2

D + L + S + E/1.4

0.9D + E/1.4

(Equation 16-16)

(Equation 16-17)

(Equation 16-18)

(Equation 16-19)

(Equation 16-20)

(Equation 16-21)

➡

Exceptions:
1. Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof live
loads or with more than three-fourths of the snow load
or one-half of the wind load.
2. Flat roof snow loads of 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2) or less and
roof live loads of 30 psf or less need not be combined
with seismic loads. Where flat roof snow loads
exceed 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2), 20 percent shall be com-
bined with seismic loads.
1605.3.2.1 Other loads. Where F, H or T are to be con-
sidered in the design, each applicable load shall be added
to the combinations specified in Section 1605.3.2.
1605.4 Heliports and helistops. Heliport and helistop landing
areas shall be designed for the following loads, combined in
accordance with Section 1605:
1. Dead load, D, plus the gross weight of the helicopter, Dh,
plus snow load, S.
2. Dead load, D, plus two single concentrated impact loads,
L, approximately 8 feet (2438 mm) apart applied any-
where on the touchdown pad (representing each of the
helicopter’s two main landing gear, whether skid type or
wheeled type), having a magnitude of 0.75 times the
gross weight of the helicopter. Both loads acting together
total 1.5 times the gross weight of the helicopter.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. Dead load, D, plus a uniform live load, L, of 100 psf (4.79
kN/m2).
Exception: Landing areas designed for helicopters with
gross weights not exceeding 3,000 pounds (13.34 kN) in
accordance with Items 1 and 2 shall be permitted to be
designed using a 40 psf (1.92 kN/m2) uniform live load in
Item 3, provided the landing area is identified with a 3,000-
pound (13.34 kN) weight limitation. This 40 psf (1.92
kN/m2) uniform live load shall not be reduced. The landing
area weight limitation shall be indicated by the numeral “3”
(kips) located in the bottom right corner of the landing area
as viewed from the primary approach path. The indication
for the landing area weight limitation shall be a minimum 5
feet (1524 mm) in height.

SECTION 1606
DEAD LOADS

1606.1 General. Dead loads are those loads defined in Section
1602.1. Dead loads shall be considered permanent loads.

1606.2 Design dead load. For purposes of design, the actual
weights of materials of construction and fixed service equip-
ment shall be used. In the absence of definite information, val-
ues used shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

SECTION 1607
LIVE LOADS

1607.1 General. Live loads are those loads defined in Section
1602.1.

1607.2 Loads not specified. For occupancies or uses not des-
ignated in Table 1607.1, the live load shall be determined in
accordance with a method approved by the building official.

1607.3 Uniform live loads. The live loads used in the design of
buildings and other structures shall be the maximum loads
expected by the intended use or occupancy but shall in no case
be less than the minimum uniformly distributed unit loads
required by Table 1607.1.

1607.4 Concentrated loads. Floors and other similar surfaces
shall be designed to support the uniformly distributed live
loads prescribed in Section 1607.3 or the concentrated load, in
pounds (kilonewtons), given in Table 1607.1, whichever pro-
duces the greater load effects. Unless otherwise specified, the
indicated concentration shall be assumed to be uniformly dis-
tributed over an area 21/2 feet by 21/2 feet [61/4 square feet (0.58
m2)] and shall be located so as to produce the maximum load
effects in the structural members.

1607.5 Partition loads. In office buildings and in other build-
ings where partition locations are subject to change, provisions
for partition weight shall be made, whether or not partitions are
shown on the construction documents, unless the specified live
load exceeds 80 psf (3.83 kN/m2). The partition load shall not
be less than a uniformly distributed live load of 15 psf (0.74
kN/m2).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

309

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:33 AM

7

TABLE 1607.1
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo,AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

1. Apartments (see residential)

—

—

2. Access floor systems
Office use
Computer use

50
100

2,000
2,000

3. Armories and drill rooms

150

—

4. Assembly areas and theaters
Fixed seats (fastened to floor)
Follow spot, projections and control
rooms
Lobbies
Movable seats
Stages and platforms
Other assembly areas

60

50
100
100
125
100

—

5. Balconies (exterior) and decksh

Same as
occupancy
served

—

6. Bowling alleys

75

—

7. Catwalks

40

300

8. Cornices

60

—

9. Corridors, except as otherwise indicated

100

—

10. Dance halls and ballrooms

100

—

11. Dining rooms and restaurants

100

—

12. Dwellings (see residential)

—

—

13. Elevator machine room grating
(on area of 4 in2)

—

300

14. Finish light floor plate construction
(on area of 1 in2)

—

200

15. Fire escapes
On single-family dwellings only

100
40

—

16. Garages (passenger vehicles only)
Trucks and buses

40
Note a
See Section 1607.6

17. Grandstands
(see stadium and arena bleachers)

—

—

18. Gymnasiums, main floors and balconies

100

—

19. Handrails, guards and grab bars

See Section 1607.7

20. Hospitals
Corridors above first floor
Operating rooms, laboratories
Patient rooms

80
60
40

1,000
1,000
1,000

21. Hotels (see residential)

—

—

22. Libraries
Corridors above first floor
Reading rooms
Stack rooms

80
60
150b

1,000
1,000
1,000

continued

TABLE 1607.1—continued
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo, AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

23. Manufacturing
Heavy
Light

250
125

3,000
2,000

24. Marquees

75

—

25. Office buildings
Corridors above first floor
File and computer rooms shall be
designed for heavier loads based
on anticipated occupancy
Lobbies and first-floor corridors
Offices

80

—

100
50

2,000

—

2,000
2,000

26. Penal institutions
Cell blocks
Corridors

40
100

—

27. Residential
One- and two-family dwellings
Uninhabitable attics without storagei
Uninhabitable attics with limited
storagei, j, k
Habitable attics and sleeping areas
All other areas
Hotels and multifamily dwellings
Private rooms and corridors
serving them
Public rooms and corridors serving
them

10
20

30
40

40

100

—

28. Reviewing stands, grandstands and
bleachers

Note c

29. Roofs
All roof surfaces subject to maintenance
workers
Awnings and canopies
Fabric construction supported by a
lightweight rigid skeleton structure
All other construction
Ordinary flat, pitched, and curved roofs
Primary roof members, exposed to a
work floor
Single panel point of lower chord of
roof trusses or any point along
primary structural members
supporting roofs:
Over manufacturing, storage
wa rehouses ,
and
repa i r
garages
All other occupancies
Roofs used for other special purposes
Roofs used for promenade purposes
Roofs used for roof gardens or
assembly purposes

5
nonreducible
20
20

Note 1
60
100

300

2,000
300
Note 1

30. Schools
Classrooms
Corridors above first floor
First-floor corridors

40
80
100

1,000
1,000
1,000

31. Scuttles, skylight ribs and accessible
ceilings

—

200

32. Sidewalks, vehicular driveways and
yards, subject to trucking

250d

8,000e

33. Skating rinks

100

—

continued

310

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

8

16_ibc_2009pg310.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:07:50 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1607.1—continued
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo,AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

34. Stadiums and arenas
Bleachers
Fixed seats (fastened to floor)

35. Stairs and exits
One- and two-family dwellings
All other

36. Storage warehouses
(shall be designed for heavier loads if
required for anticipated storage)
Heavy
Light

37. Stores
Retail
First floor
Upper floors
Wholesale, all floors

38. Vehicle barrier systems

39. Walkways and elevated platforms
(other than exitways)

40. Yards and terraces, pedestrians

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

100c
60c

40
100

250
125

100
75
125

—

Note f

1,000
1,000
1,000

See Section 1607.7.3

60

100

—

—

For SI:

1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2,
1 square foot = 0.0929 m2,
1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 pound = 0.004448 kN,
1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m3
a. Floors in garages or portions of buildings used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be
designed for the uniformly distributed live loads of Table 1607.1 or the following con-
centrated loads: (1) for garages restricted to passenger vehicles accommodating not
more than nine passengers, 3,000 pounds acting on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches;
(2) for mechanical parking structures without slab or deck which are used for storing
passenger vehicles only, 2,250 pounds per wheel.
b. The loading applies to stack room floors that support nonmobile, double-faced library
bookstacks, subject to the following limitations:
1. The nominal bookstack unit height shall not exceed 90 inches;
2. The nominal shelf depth shall not exceed 12 inches for each face; and
3. Parallel rows of double-faced bookstacks shall be separated by aisles not less
than 36 inches wide.
c. Design in accordance with the ICC 300.
d. Other uniform loads in accordance with an approved method which contains provisions
for truck loadings shall also be considered where appropriate.
e. The concentrated wheel load shall be applied on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches.
f. Minimum concentrated load on stair treads (on area of 4 square inches) is 300 pounds.
g. Where snow loads occur that are in excess of the design conditions, the structure shall
be designed to support the loads due to the increased loads caused by drift buildup or a
greater snow design determined by the building official (see Section 1608). For spe-
cial-purpose roofs, see Section 1607.11.2.2.
h. See Section 1604.8.3 for decks attached to exterior walls.
i. Attics without storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joist and
rafter is less than 42 inches, or where there are not two or more adjacent trusses with the
same web configuration capable of containing a rectangle 42 inches high by 2 feet
wide, or greater, located within the plane of the truss. For attics without storage, this live
load need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirements.
j. For attics with limited storage and constructed with trusses, this live load need only be
applied to those portions of the bottom chord where there are two or more adjacent
trusses with the same web configuration capable of containing a rectangle 42 inches
high by 2 feet wide or greater, located within the plane of the truss. The rectangle shall
fit between the top of the bottom chord and the bottom of any other truss member, pro-
vided that each of the following criteria is met:
i. The attic area is accessible by a pull-down stairway or framed opening in accor-
dance with Section 1209.2, and
ii. The truss shall have a bottom chord pitch less than 2:12.
iii. Bottom chords of trusses shall be designed for the greater of actual imposed dead
load or 10 psf, uniformly distributed over the entire span.
k. Attic spaces served by a fixed stair shall be designed to support the minimum live load
specified for habitable attics and sleeping rooms.
l. Roofs used for other special purposes shall be designed for appropriate loads as
approved by the building official.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

1607.6 Truck and bus garages. Minimum live loads for
garages having trucks or buses shall be as specified in Table
1607.6, but shall not be less than 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), unless
other loads are specifically justified and approved by the build-
ing official. Actual loads shall be used where they are greater
than the loads specified in the table.
1607.6.1 Truck and bus garage live load application. The
concentrated load and uniform load shall be uniformly dis-
tributed over a 10-foot (3048 mm) width on a line normal to
the centerline of the lane placed within a 12-foot-wide
(3658 mm) lane. The loads shall be placed within their indi-
vidual lanes so as to produce the maximum stress in each
structural member. Single spans shall be designed for the
uniform load in Table 1607.6 and one simultaneous concen-
trated load positioned to produce the maximum effect. Mul-
tiple spans shall be designed for the uniform load in Table
1607.6 on the spans and two simultaneous concentrated
loads in two spans positioned to produce the maximum neg-
ative moment effect. Multiple span design loads, for other
effects, shall be the same as for single spans.

TABLE 1607.6
UNIFORM AND CONCENTRATED LOADS

LOADING
CLASSa

UNIFORM LOAD
(pounds/linear
foot of lane)

H20-44 and HS20-44

H15-44 and HS15-44

640

480

CONCENTRATED LOAD
(pounds)b

For moment
design

For shear
design

18,000

13,500

26,000

19,500

For SI: 1 pound per linear foot = 0.01459 kN/m, 1 pound = 0.004448 kN,
1 ton = 8.90 kN.
a. An H loading class designates a two-axle truck with a semitrailer. An HS
loading class designates a tractor truck with a semitrailer. The numbers fol-
lowing the letter classification indicate the gross weight in tons of the stan-
dard truck and the year the loadings were instituted.
b. See Section 1607.6.1 for the loading of multiple spans.

1607.7 Loads on handrails, guards, grab bars, seats and
vehicle barrier systems. Handrails, guards, grab bars, acces-
sible seats, accessible benches and vehicle barrier systems
shall be designed and constructed to the structural loading con-
ditions set forth in this section.
1607.7.1 Handrails and guards. Handrails and guards
shall be designed to resist a load of 50 pounds per linear foot
(plf) (0.73 kN/m) applied in any direction at the top and to
transfer this load through the supports to the structure. Glass
handrail assemblies and guards shall also comply with Sec-
tion 2407.
Exceptions:
1. For one- and two-family dwellings, only the single
concentrated load required by Section 1607.7.1.1
shall be applied.
2. In Group I-3, F, H and S occupancies, for areas that
are not accessible to the general public and that
have an occupant load less than 50, the minimum
load shall be 20 pounds per foot (0.29 kN/m).
1607.7.1.1 Concentrated load. Handrails and guards
shall be able to resist a single concentrated load of 200
pounds (0.89 kN), applied in any direction at any point

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

311

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:34 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

along the top, and to transfer this load through the sup-
ports to the structure. This load need not be assumed to
act concurrently with the loads specified in Section
1607.7.1.
1607.7.1.2 Components. Intermediate rails (all those
except the handrail), balusters and panel fillers shall be
designed to withstand a horizontally applied normal load
of 50 pounds (0.22 kN) on an area equal to 1 square foot
(0.093 m2), including openings and space between rails.
Reactions due to this loading are not required to be
supe r impo sed w i th tho se o f Sec t ion 1607 .7 .1 o r
1607.7.1.1.
1607.7.2 Grab bars, shower seats and dressing room
bench seats. Grab bars, shower seats and dressing room
bench seat systems shall be designed to resist a single con-
centrated load of 250 pounds (1.11 kN) applied in any direc-
tion at any point.
1607.7.3 Vehicle barrier systems. Vehicle barrier systems
for passenger vehicles shall be designed to resist a single
load of 6,000 pounds (26.70 kN) applied horizontally in any
direction to the barrier system and shall have anchorage or
attachment capable of transmitting this load to the structure.
For design of the system, two loading conditions shall be
analyzed. The first condition shall apply the load at a height
of 1 foot, 6 inches (457 mm) above the floor or ramp surface.
The second loading condition shall apply the load at 2 feet, 3
inches (686 mm) above the floor or ramp surface. The more
severe load condition shall govern the design of the barrier
restraint system. The load shall be assumed to act on an area
not to exceed 1 square foot (0.0929 m2), and is not required
to be assumed to act concurrently with any handrail or guard
loadings specified in Section 1607.7.1. Garages accommo-
dating trucks and buses shall be designed in accordance
with an approved method that contains provisions for traffic
railings.
1607.8 Impact loads. The live loads specified in Section
1607.3 include allowance for impact conditions. Provisions
shall be made in the structural design for uses and loads that
involve unusual vibration and impact forces.
1607.8.1 Elevators. Elevator loads shall be increased by
100 percent for impact and the structural supports shall be
designed within the limits of deflection prescribed by
ASME A17.1.
1607.8.2 Machinery. For the purpose of design, the weight
of machinery and moving loads shall be increased as fol-
lows to allow for impact: (1) elevator machinery, 100 per-
cent; (2) light machinery, shaft- or motor-driven, 20 percent;
(3) reciprocating machinery or power-driven units, 50 per-
cent; (4) hangers for floors or balconies, 33 percent. Per-
centages shall be increased where specified by the
manufacturer.
1607.9 Reduction in live loads. Except for uniform live loads
at roofs, all other minimum uniformly distributed live loads, Lo,
in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with
Section 1607.9.1 or 1607.9.2. Roof uniform live loads, other
than special purpose roofs of Section 1607.11.2.2, are permit-

ted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.11.2. Roof
uniform live loads of special purpose roofs are permitted to be
reduced in accordance with Section 1607.9.1 or 1607.9.2.
1607.9.1 General. Subject to the limitations of Sections
1607.9.1.1 through 1607.9.1.4, members for which a value
of KLLAT is 400 square feet (37.16 m2) or more are permitted
to be designed for a reduced live load in accordance with the
following equation:

L

=

L

o

0 25
.

+

æ
ç
ç
è

For SI: L

=

L

o

15
K A

LL

T

ö
÷
÷
ø

(Equation 16-22)

0 25
.

+

æ
ç
ç
è

4 57
.
K A

LL

T

ö
÷
÷
ø

where:
L = Reduced design live load per square foot (meter) of
area supported by the member.
Lo = Unreduced design live load per square foot (meter) of
area supported by the member (see Table 1607.1).
KLL = Live load element factor (see Table 1607.9.1).
AT = Tributary area, in square feet (square meters).
L shall not be less than 0.50Lo for members supporting one
floor and L shall not be less than 0.40Lo for members sup-
porting two or more floors.

TABLE 1607.9.1
LIVE LOAD ELEMENT FACTOR, KLL

ELEMENT

KLL

Interior columns
Exterior columns without cantilever slabs

Edge columns with cantilever slabs

Corner columns with cantilever slabs
Edge beams without cantilever slabs
Interior beams

All other members not identified above including:
Edge beams with cantilever slabs
Cantilever beams
One-way slabs
Two-way slabs
Members without provisions for continuous shear
transfer normal to their span

4
4

3

2
2
2

1

1607.9.1.1 One-way slabs. The tributary area, AT, for
use in Equation 16-22 for one-way slabs shall not exceed
an area defined by the slab span times a width normal to
the span of 1.5 times the slab span.
1607.9.1.2 Heavy live loads. Live loads that exceed 100
psf (4.79 kN/m2) shall not be reduced.
Exceptions:
1. The live loads for members supporting two or
more floors are permitted to be reduced by a
maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall

312

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:34 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

not be less than L as calculated in Section
1607.9.1.
2. For uses other than storage, where approved,
additional live load reductions shall be permit-
ted where shown by the registered design pro-
fessional that a rational approach has been used
and that such reductions are warranted.
1607.9.1.3 Passenger vehicle garages. The live loads
shall not be reduced in passenger vehicle garages.
Exception: The live loads for members supporting
two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a
maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall not be
less than L as calculated in Section 1607.9.1.
1607.9.1.4 Group A occupancies. Live loads of 100 psf
(4.79 kN/m2) and at areas where fixed seats are located
shall not be reduced in Group A occupancies.
1607.9.1.5 Roof members. Live loads of 100 psf (4.79
kN/m2) or less shall not be reduced for roof members
except as specified in Section 1607.11.2.
1607.9.2 Alternate floor live load reduction. As an alter-
native to Section 1607.9.1, floor live loads are permitted to
be reduced in accordance with the following provisions.
Such reductions shall apply to slab systems, beams, girders,
columns, piers, walls and foundations.
1. A reduction shall not be permitted in Group A occu-
pancies.
2. A reduction shall not be permitted where the live load
exceeds 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2) except that the design
live load for members supporting two or more floors
is permitted to be reduced by 20 percent.
Exception: For uses other than storage, where
approved, additional live load reductions shall be
permitted where shown by the registered design
professional that a rational approach has been used
and that such reductions are warranted.
3. A reduction shall not be permitted in passenger vehi-
cle parking garages except that the live loads for
members supporting two or more floors are permitted
to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.
4. For live loads not exceeding 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2), the
design live load for any structural member supporting
150 square feet (13.94 m2) or more is permitted to be
reduced in accordance with Equation 16-23.
5. For one-way slabs, the area, A, for use in Equation
16-23 shall not exceed the product of the slab span
and a width normal to the span of 0.5 times the slab
span.

R = 0.08(A - 150)

(Equation 16-23)

For SI: R = 0.861(A - 13.94)
Such reduction shall not exceed the smallest of:
1. 40 percent for horizontal members;
2. 60 percent for vertical members; or

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. R as determined by the following equation.

R

(Equation 16-24)

R = 23.1(1 + D/Lo)
where:
A
= Area of floor supported by the member,
square feet (m2).
D = Dead load per square foot (m2) of area sup-
ported.
Lo = Unreduced live load per square foot (m2) of
area supported.
= Reduction in percent.
1607.10 Distribution of floor loads. Where uniform floor live
loads are involved in the design of structural members arranged
so as to create continuity, the minimum applied loads shall be
the full dead loads on all spans in combination with the floor
live loads on spans selected to produce the greatest effect at
each location under consideration. It shall be permitted to
reduce floor live loads in accordance with Section 1607.9.
1607.11 Roof loads. The structural supports of roofs and mar-
quees shall be designed to resist wind and, where applicable,
snow and earthquake loads, in addition to the dead load of con-
struction and the appropriate live loads as prescribed in this
section, or as set forth in Table 1607.1. The live loads acting on
a sloping surface shall be assumed to act vertically on the hori-
zontal projection of that surface.
1607.11.1 Distribution of roof loads. Where uniform roof
live loads are reduced to less than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m2) in
accordance with Section 1607.11.2.1 and are applied to the
design of structural members arranged so as to create conti-
nuity, the reduced roof live load shall be applied to adjacent
spans or to alternate spans, whichever produces the most
unfavorable load effect. See Section 1607.11.2 for reduc-
tions in minimum roof live loads and Section 7.5 of ASCE 7
for partial snow loading.
1607.11.2 Reduction in roof live loads. The minimum uni-
formly distributed live loads of roofs and marquees, Lo, in
Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with
Section 1607.11.2.1 or 1607.11.2.2.
1607.11.2.1 Flat, pitched and curved roofs. Ordinary
flat, pitched and curved roofs, and awnings and canopies
other than of fabric construction supported by light-
weight rigid skeleton structures, are permitted to be
designed for a reduced roof live load as specified in the
following equations or other controlling combinations of
loads in Section 1605, whichever produces the greater
load. In structures such as greenhouses, where special
scaffolding is used as a work surface for workers and
materials during maintenance and repair operations, a
lower roof load than specified in the following equations
shall not be used unless approved by the building official.
Such structures shall be designed for a minimum roof
live load of 12 psf (0.58 kN/m2).

Lr = Lo R1R2

where: 12 £ Lr £ 20

(Equation 16-25)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

313

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

For SI: Lr = LoR1R2
where: 0.58 £ Lr £ 0.96
Lr = Reduced live load per square foot (m2) of horizon-
tal projection in pounds per square foot (kN/m2).
The reduction factors R1 and R2 shall be determined as
follows:

R1 = 1 for At £ 200 square feet
(18.58 m2)

(Equation 16-26)

R1 = 1.2 – 0.001At for 200 square
feet < At < 600 square feet
For SI: 1.2 – 0.011At for 18.58 square meters < At < 55.74
square meters

(Equation 16-27)

R1 = 0.6 for At ³ 600 square feet
(55.74 m2)

(Equation 16-28)

where:
At = Tributary area (span length multiplied by effective
width) in square feet (m2) supported by any struc-
tural member, and

R2 = 1 for F £ 4

R2 = 1.2 – 0.05 F for 4 < F < 12

(Equation 16-29)

(Equation 16-30)

(Equation 16-31)

R2 = 0.6 for F ³ 12
where:
F = For a sloped roof, the number of inches of rise per
foot (for SI: F = 0.12 ´ slope, with slope expressed
as a percentage), or for an arch or dome, the
rise-to-span ratio multiplied by 32.
1607.11.2.2 Special-purpose roofs. Roofs used for
promenade purposes, roof gardens, assembly purposes
or other special purposes, and marquees, shall be
designed for a minimum live load, Lo, as specified in
Table 1607.1. Such live loads are permitted to be reduced
in accordance with Section 1607.9. Live loads of 100 psf
(4.79 kN/m2) or more at areas of roofs classified as
Group A occupancies shall not be reduced.
1607.11.3 Landscaped roofs. Where roofs are to be land-
scaped, the uniform design live load in the landscaped area
shall be 20 psf (0.958 kN/m2). The weight of the landscap-
ing materials shall be considered as dead load and shall be
computed on the basis of saturation of the soil.
1607.11.4 Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies
shall be designed for uniform live loads as required in Table
1607.1 as well as for snow loads and wind loads as specified
in Sections 1608 and 1609.
1607.12 Crane loads. The crane live load shall be the rated
capacity of the crane. Design loads for the runway beams,
including connections and support brackets, of moving bridge
cranes and monorail cranes shall include the maximum wheel

loads of the crane and the vertical impact, lateral and longitudi-
nal forces induced by the moving crane.
1607.12.1 Maximum wheel load. The maximum wheel
loads shall be the wheel loads produced by the weight of the
bridge, as applicable, plus the sum of the rated capacity and
the weight of the trolley with the trolley positioned on its
runway at the location where the resulting load effect is
maximum.
1607.12.2 Vertical impact force. The maximum wheel
loads of the crane shall be increased by the percentages
shown below to determine the induced vertical impact or
vibration force:
Monorail cranes (powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 25 percent
Cab-operated or remotely operated
bridge cranes (powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 25 percent
Pendant-operated bridge cranes
(powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 10 percent
Bridge cranes or monorail cranes with
hand-geared bridge, trolley and hoist ·  ·  ·  ·  · 0 percent
1607.12.3 Lateral force. The lateral force on crane runway
beams with electrically powered trolleys shall be calculated
as 20 percent of the sum of the rated capacity of the crane
and the weight of the hoist and trolley. The lateral force shall
be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a
runway beam, in either direction perpendicular to the beam,
and shall be distributed according to the lateral stiffness of
the runway beam and supporting structure.
1607.12.4 Longitudinal force. The longitudinal force on
crane runway beams, except
for bridge cranes with
hand-geared bridges, shall be calculated as 10 percent of the
maximum wheel loads of the crane. The longitudinal force
shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of
a runway beam, in either direction parallel to the beam.
1607.13 Interior walls and partitions. Interior walls and par-
titions that exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, including their
finish materials, shall have adequate strength to resist the loads
to which they are subjected but not less than a horizontal load of
5 psf (0.240 kN/m2).
Exception: Fabric partitions complying with Section
1607.13.1 shall not be required to resist the minimum hori-
zontal load of 5 psf (0.24 kN/m2).
1607.13.1 Fabric partitions. Fabric partitions that exceed 6
feet (1829 mm) in height, including their finish materials,
shall have adequate strength to resist the following load con-
ditions:
1. A horizontal distributed load of 5 psf (0.24 kN/m2)
applied to the partition framing. The total area used to
determine the distributed load shall be the area of the
fabric face between the framing members to which
the fabric is attached. The total distributed load shall
be uniformly applied to such framing members in
proportion to the length of each member.

314

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

2. A concentrated load of 40 pounds (0.176 kN) applied
to an 8-inch diameter (203 mm) area [50.3 square
inches (32 452 mm2)] of the fabric face at a height of
54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.

SECTION 1608
SNOW LOADS

1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall be determined in
accordance with Chapter 7 of ASCE 7, but the design roof load
shall not be less than that determined by Section 1607.
1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used
in determining the design snow loads for roofs shall be deter-
mined in accordance with ASCE 7 or Figure 1608.2 for the
contiguous United States and Table 1608.2 for Alaska.
Site-specific case studies shall be made in areas designated
“CS” in Figure 1608.2. Ground snow loads for sites at eleva-
tions above the limits indicated in Figure 1608.2 and for all
sites within the CS areas shall be approved. Ground snow load
determination for such sites shall be based on an extreme value
statistical analysis of data available in the vicinity of the site
using a value with a 2-percent annual probability of being
exceeded (50-year mean recurrence interval). Snow loads are
zero for Hawaii, except in mountainous regions as approved by
the building official.

SECTION 1609
WIND LOADS

1609.1 Applications. Buildings, structures and parts thereof
shall be designed to withstand the minimum wind loads pre-

scribed herein. Decreases in wind loads shall not be made for
the effect of shielding by other structures.

1609.1.1 Determination of wind loads. Wind loads on
every building or structure shall be determined in accor-
dance with Chapter 6 of ASCE 7 or provisions of the alter-
nate all-heights method in Section 1609.6. The type of
opening protection required, the basic wind speed and the
exposure category for a site is permitted to be determined in
accordance with Section 1609 or ASCE 7. Wind shall be
assumed to come from any horizontal direction and wind
pressures shall be assumed to act normal to the surface con-
sidered.

Exceptions:

1. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
the provisions of ICC 600 shall be permitted for
applicable Group R-2 and R-3 buildings.
2. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
residential structures using the provisions of the
AF&PA WFCM.
3. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
residential structures using the provisions of AISI
S230.
4. Designs using NAAMM FP 1001.
5. Designs using TIA-222 for antenna-supporting
structures and antennas.
6. Wind tunnel tests in accordance with Section 6.6
of ASCE 7, subject to the limitations in Section
1609.1.1.2.

TABLE 1608.2
GROUND SNOW LOADS, pg , FOR ALASKAN LOCATIONS

LOCATION

Adak

Anchorage

Angoon

Barrow

Barter Island

Bethel

Big Delta

Cold Bay

Cordova

Fairbanks

Fort Yukon

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

30

50

70

25

35

40

50

25

100

60

60

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.

LOCATION

Galena

Gulkana

Homer

Juneau

Kenai

Kodiak

Kotzebue

McGrath

Nenana

Nome

Palmer

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

60

70

40

60

70

30

60

70

80

70

50

LOCATION

Petersburg

St. Paul Islands

Seward

Shemya

Sitka

Talkeetna

Unalakleet

Valdez

Whittier

Wrangell

Yakutat

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

150

40

50

25

50

120

50

160

300

60

150

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

315

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

In CS areas, site-specific Case Studies are required to
establish ground snow loads. Extreme local variations in
ground snow loads in these areas preclude mapping at
this scale.

Numbers in parentheses represent the upper elevation
limits in feet for the ground snow load values presented
below. Site -specific case studies are required to estab-
lish ground snow loads at elevations not covered.

To convert lb/sq ft to kNm2, multiply by 0.0479.

To convert feet to meters, multiply by 0.3048.

FIGURE 1608.2
GROUND SNOW LOADS, pg, FOR THE UNITED STATES (psf)

316

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg316.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:42:35 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

CHAPTER 15

SECTION 1501
GENERAL

1501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
design, materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies,
and rooftop structures.

SECTION 1502
DEFINITIONS

1502.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
AGGREGATE. In roofing, crushed stone, crushed slag or
water-worn gravel used for surfacing for roof coverings.
BALLAST. In roofing, ballast comes in the form of large
stones or paver systems or light-weight interlocking paver sys-
tems and is used to provide uplift resistance for roofing systems
that are not adhered or mechanically attached to the roof deck.
BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt
cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral
aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.
INTERLAYMENT. A layer of felt or nonbituminous satu-
rated felt not less than 18 inches (457 mm) wide, shingled
between each course of a wood-shake roof covering.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN . A partially
enclosed rooftop structure used to aesthetically conceal heat-
ing, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) electrical or
mechanical equipment from view.
METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having
a minimum installed weather exposure of 3 square feet (0.279
m2) per sheet.
METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet hav-
ing an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.279
m2) per sheet.
MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more
layers of polymer-modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials
shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate
or held in place with an approved ballast layer.
PENTHOUSE. An enclosed, unoccupied structure above the
roof of a building, other than a tank, tower, spire, dome cupola
or bulkhead.
POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. The drainage condition in
which consideration has been made for all loading deflections
of the roof deck, and additional slope has been provided to
ensure drainage of the roof within 48 hours of precipitation.

REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an
existing roof covering. See “Roof recover” and “Roof replace-
ment.”
ROOF ASSEMBLY. A system designed to provide weather
protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists
of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving
as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly
includes the roof deck, vapor retarder, substrate or thermal bar-
rier, insulation, vapor retarder and roof covering.
The definition of “Roof assembly” is limited in application
to the provisions of Chapter 15.
ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck
for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.
ROOF COVERING SYSTEM. See “Roof assembly.”
ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface not including its sup-
porting members or vertical supports.
ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional
roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without
removing the existing roof covering.
ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an
existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.
ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the exist-
ing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and install-
ing a new roof covering.
ROOF VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process
of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing
such air from, attics, cathedral ceilings or other enclosed spaces
over which a roof assembly is installed.
ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. An enclosed structure on or
above the roof of any part of a building.
SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water
to drain from a roof.
SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is
field applied using one layer of membrane material (either
homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.
UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of felt, sheathing
paper, nonbituminous saturated felt or other approved material
over which a steep-slope roof covering is applied.

SECTION 1503
WEATHER PROTECTION

1503.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved
roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accor-
dance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof coverings shall
be designed and installed in accordance with this code and the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

287

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:36 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

approved manufacturer’s instructions such that the roof cover-
ing shall serve to protect the building or structure.
1503.2 Flashing. Flashing shall be installed in such a manner
so as to prevent moisture entering the wall and roof through
joints in copings, through moisture-permeable materials and at
intersections with parapet walls and other penetrations through
the roof plane.
1503.2.1 Locations. Flashing shall be installed at wall and
roof intersections, at gutters, wherever there is a change in
roof slope or direction and around roof openings. Where
flashing is of metal, the metal shall be corrosion resistant
with a thickness of not less than 0.019 inch (0.483 mm) (No.
26 galvanized sheet).
1503.3 Coping. Parapet walls shall be properly coped with
noncombustible, weatherproof materials of a width no less
than the thickness of the parapet wall.
[P] 1503.4 Roof drainage. Design and installation of roof
drainage systems shall comply with Section 1503 and the
International Plumbing Code.

1503.4.1 Secondary drainage required. Secondary (emer-
gency) roof drains or scuppers shall be provided where the
roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a
manner that water will be entrapped if the primary drains
allow buildup for any reason.
1503.4.2 Scuppers. When scuppers are used for secondary
(emergency overflow) roof drainage, the quantity, size,
location and inlet elevation of the scuppers shall be sized to
prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for
which the roof was designed as determined by Section
1503.4.1. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of
less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary
system shall not be considered when locating and sizing
scuppers.
1503.4.3 Gutters. Gutters and leaders placed on the outside
of buildings, other than Group R-3, private garages and
buildings
of Type V construction,
shall
be
of
noncombustible material or a minimum of Schedule 40
plastic pipe.
1503.5 Roof ventilation. Intake and exhaust vents shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 1203.2 and the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1503.6 Crickets and saddles. A cricket or saddle shall be
installed on the ridge side of any chimney or penetration
greater than 30 inches (762 mm) wide as measured perpendicu-
lar to the slope. Cricket or saddle coverings shall be sheet metal
or of the same material as the roof covering.

SECTION 1504
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1504.1 Wind resistance of roofs. Roof decks and roof cover-
ings shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with Chap-
ter 16 and Sections 1504.2, 1504.3 and 1504.4.
1504.1.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles. Asphalt
shingles shall comply with Section 1507.2.7.

1504.2 Wind resistance of clay and concrete tile. Wind loads
on clay and concrete tile roof coverings shall be in accordance
with Section 1609.5.
1504.3 Wind resistance of nonballasted roofs. Roof cover-
ings installed on roofs in accordance with Section 1507 that are
mechanically attached or adhered to the roof deck shall be
designed to resist the design wind load pressures for compo-
nents and cladding in accordance with Section 1609.
1504.3.1 Other roof systems. Roof systems with built-up,
modified bitumen, fully adhered or mechanically attached
single-ply through fastened metal panel roof systems, and
other types of membrane roof coverings shall also be tested
in accordance with FM 4474, UL 580 or UL 1897.
1504.3.2 Metal panel roof systems. Metal panel roof sys-
tems through fastened or standing seam shall be tested in
accordance with UL 580 or ASTM E 1592.
Exception: Metal roofs constructed of cold-formed
steel, where the roof deck acts as the roof covering and
provides both weather protection and support for struc-
tural loads, shall be permitted to be designed and tested
in accordance with the applicable referenced structural
design standard in Section 2209.1.
1504.4 Ballasted low-slope roof systems. Ballasted low-slope
(roof slope < 2:12) single-ply roof system coverings installed
in accordance with Sections 1507.12 and 1507.13 shall be
designed in accordance with Section 1504.8 and ANSI/SPRI
RP-4.
1504.5 Edge securement for low-slope roofs. Low-slope
membrane roof system metal edge securement, except gutters,
shall be designed and installed for wind loads in accordance
with Chapter 16 and tested for resistance in accordance with
ANSI/SPRI ES-1, except the basic wind speed shall be deter-
mined from Figure 1609.
1504.6 Physical properties. Roof coverings installed on
low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section
1507 shall demonstrate physical integrity over the working life
of the roof based upon 2,000 hours of exposure to accelerated
weathering tests conducted in accordance with ASTM G 152,
ASTM G 155 or ASTM G 154. Those roof coverings that are
subject to cyclical flexural response due to wind loads shall not
demonstrate any significant loss of tensile strength for
unreinforced membranes or breaking strength for reinforced
membranes when tested as herein required.
1504.7 Impact resistance. Roof coverings installed on
low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section
1507 shall resist impact damage based on the results of tests
conducted in accordance with ASTM D 3746, ASTM D 4272,
CGSB 37-GP-52M or the “Resistance to Foot Traffic Test” in
Section 5.5 of FM 4470.
1504.8 Aggregate. Aggregate used as surfacing for roof cover-
ings and aggregate, gravel or stone used as ballast shall not be
used on the roof of a building located in a hurricane-prone
region as defined in Section 1609.2, or on any other building
with a mean roof height exceeding that permitted by Table
1504.8 based on the exposure category and basic wind speed at
the site.

288

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:37 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1504.8
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE MEAN ROOF HEIGHT PERMITTED FOR
BUILDINGS WITH AGGREGATE ON THE ROOF IN AREAS
OUTSIDE A HURRICANE-PRONE REGION

BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609
(mph)b

85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Greater than 120

MAXIMUM MEAN ROOF HEIGHT (ft)a, c
Exposure category

B

170
110
75
55
40
30
20
15
NP

C

60
35
20
15
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

D

30
15
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP
NP

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Mean roof height as defined in ASCE 7.
b. For intermediate values of basic wind speed, the height associated with the
next higher value of wind speed shall be used, or direct interpolation is per-
mitted.
c. NP = gravel and stone not permitted for any roof height.

SECTION 1505
FIRE CLASSIFICATION

1505.1 General. Roof assemblies shall be divided into the
classes defined below. Class A, B and C roof assemblies and
roof coverings required to be listed by this section shall be
tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition,
fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested in
accordance with ASTM D 2898. The minimum roof coverings
installed on buildings shall comply with Table 1505.1 based on
the type of construction of the building.
Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with
Chapter 24 or Section 2610.

TABLE 1505.1a, b
MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION
FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA
B

IB
B

IIA
B

IIB
Cc

IIIA IIIB
B
Cc

IV
B

VA
B

VB
Cc

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a . Un l e s s o th e rw i s e r equ i r ed in a c co rd an c e w i th th e In t e r na t iona l
Wildland-Urban Interface Code or due to the location of the building within
a fire district in accordance with Appendix D.
b. Nonclassified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of Group R-3
and Group U occupancies, where there is a minimum fire-separation dis-
tance of 6 feet measured from the leading edge of the roof.
c. Buildings that are not more than two stories above grade plane and having
not more than 6,000 square feet of projected roof area and where there is a
minimum 10-foot fire-separation distance from the leading edge of the roof
to a lot line on all sides of the building, except for street fronts or public ways,
shall be permitted to have roofs of No. 1 cedar or redwood shakes and No. 1
shingles.

1505.2 Class A roof assemblies. Class A roof assemblies are
those that are effective against severe fire test exposure. Class
A roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identi-
fied as Class A by an approved testing agency. Class A roof

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

assemblies shall be permitted for use in buildings or structures
of all types of construction.
Exceptions:
1. Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings
of brick, masonry or an exposed concrete roof deck.
2. Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or cop-
per shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay
or concrete roof tile or slate installed on noncombusti-
ble decks or ferrous, copper or metal sheets installed
without a roof deck on noncombustible framing.
1505.3 Class B roof assemblies. Class B roof assemblies are
those that are effective against moderate fire-test exposure.
Class B roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and
identified as Class B by an approved testing agency.
1505.4 Class C roof assemblies. Class C roof assemblies are
those that are effective against light fire-test exposure. Class C
roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identi-
fied as Class C by an approved testing agency.
1505 .5 Nonc lass ified roofing. Nonc lass ified roofing is
approved material that is not listed as a Class A, B or C roof
covering.
1505.6 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles shall be
treated by impregnation with chemicals by the full-cell vac-
uum-pressure process, in accordance with AWPA C1. Each
bundle shall be marked to identify the manufactured unit and
the manufacturer, and shall also be labeled to identify the clas-
sification of the material in accordance with the testing
required in Section 1505.1, the treating company and the qual-
ity control agency.
1505.7 Special purpose roofs. Special purpose wood shingle
or wood shake roofing shall conform with the grading and
application requirements of Section 1507.8 or 1507.9. In addi-
t ion , an und e r laym en t o f 5 / 8 - in ch (15 .9 mm ) Typ e X
water-resistant gypsum backing board or gypsum sheathing
shall be placed under minimum nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7
mm) wood structural panel solid sheathing or 1-inch (25 mm)
nominal spaced sheathing.

SECTION 1506
MATERIALS

1506.1 Scope. The requirements set forth in this section shall
apply to the application of roof-covering materials specified
herein. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with this
chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Instal-
lation of roof coverings shall comply with the applicable provi-
sions of Section 1507.
1506.2 Compatibility of materials. Roofs and roof coverings
shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and
with the building or structure to which the materials are
applied.
1506.3 Material specifications and physical characteristics.
Roof-covering materials shall conform to the applicable stan-
dards listed in this chapter. In the absence of applicable stan-
dards or where materials are of questionable suitability, testing

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

289

15_ibc_2009pg289.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:26:21 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

by an approved agency shall be required by the building code
official to determine the character, quality and limitations of
application of the materials.
1506.4 Product identification. Roof-covering materials shall
be delivered in packages bearing the manufacturer’s identify-
ing marks and approved testing agency labels required in
accordance with Section 1505. Bulk shipments of materials
shall be accompanied with the same information issued in the
form of a certificate or on a bill of lading by the manufacturer.

SECTION 1507
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS

1507.1 Scope. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance
with the applicable provisions of this section and the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1507.2 Asphalt shingles. The installation of asphalt shingles
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.2.1 Deck requirements. Asphalt shingles shall be fas-
tened to solidly sheathed decks.
1507.2.2 Slope. Asphalt shingles shall only be used on roof
slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-per-
cent slope) or greater. For roof slopes from two units vertical
in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope) up to four units ver-
tical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope), double
underlayment application is required in accordance with
Section 1507.2.8.
1507.2.3 Underlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required
underlayment shall conform to ASTM D 226, Type I,
ASTM D 4869, Type I, or ASTM D 6757.
1507.2.4 Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet.
Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall com-
ply with ASTM D 1970.
1507.2.5 Asphalt shingles. Asphalt shingles shall comply
with ASTM D 225 or ASTM D 3462.
1507.2.6 Fasteners. Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be
galvanized, stainless steel, aluminum or copper roofing
nails, minimum 12 gage [0.105 inch (2.67 mm)] shank with
a minimum 3/8 inch-diameter (9.5 mm) head, of a length to
penetrate through the roofing materials and a minimum of
3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the roof sheathing. Where the roof
sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) thick, the nails shall
penetrate through the sheathing. Fasteners shall comply
with ASTM F 1667.
1507.2.7 Attachment. Asphalt shingles shall have the min-
imum number of fasteners required by the manufacturer, but
not less than four fasteners per strip shingle or two fasteners
per individual shingle. Where the roof slope exceeds 21
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21:12), shingles shall be
installed as required by the manufacturer.
1507.2.7.1 Wind resistance. Asphalt shingles shall be
tested in accordance with ASTM D 7158. Asphalt shin-
gles shall meet the classification requirements of Table
1507.2.7.1(1) for the appropriate maximum basic wind
speed. Asphalt shingle packaging shall bear a label to

290

indicate comp liance w ith ASTM D 7158 and the
required classification in Table 1507.2.7.1(1).

Exception: Asphalt shingles not included in the
scope of ASTM D 7158 shall be tested and labeled to
indicate compliance with ASTM D 3161 and the
required classification in Table 1507.2.7.1(2).

TABLE 1507.2.7.1(1)
CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT ROOF SHINGLES
PER ASTM D 7158a

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609

CLASSIFICATION
REQUIREMENT

85

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

D, G or H

D, G or H

G or H

G or H

G or H

H

H

H

a. The standard calculations contained in ASTM D 7158 assume exposure cat-
egory B or C and building height of 60 feet (18 288 mm) or less. Additional
calculations are required for conditions outside of these assumptions.

TABLE 1507.2.7.1(2)
CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT SHINGLES PER ASTM D 3161

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE 1609

CLASSIFICATION
REQUIREMENT

85

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

A, D or F

A, D or F

A, D or F

F

F

F

F

F

1507.2.8 Underlayment application. For roof slopes from
two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope)
and up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-per-
cent slope), underlayment shall be two layers applied in the
following manner. Apply a minimum 19-inch-wide (483
mm) strip of underlayment felt parallel with and starting at
the eaves, fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Starting at
the eave, apply 36-inch-wide (914 mm)
sheets of
underlayment overlapping successive sheets 19 inches (483
mm), by fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in
the underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the
shingles to seal. For roof slopes of four units vertical in 12
units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater, underlayment
shall be one layer applied in the following manner.
Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion, parallel to
and starting from the eave and lapped 2 inches (51 mm), fas-
tened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:37 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the shin-
gles to seal.
1507.2.8.1 High wind attachment. Underlayment
applied in areas subject to high winds (greater than 110
mph in accordance with Figure 1609) shall be applied
with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Fasteners are to be applied
along the overlap at a maximum spacing of 36 inches
(914 mm) on center.
1507.2.8.2 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a
history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water, an ice barrier that consists of at least two layers
of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering
polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of
normal underlayment and extend from the lowest edges
of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm)
inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con-
tain no conditioned floor area.
1507.2.9 Flashings. Flashing for asphalt shingles shall
comply with this section. Flashing shall be applied in accor-
dance with this section and the asphalt shingle manufac-
turer’s printed instructions.
1507.2.9.1 Base and cap flashing. Base and cap flash-
ing shall be installed in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s instructions. Base flashing shall be of either
c o r r o s i o n - r e s i s t a n t m e t a l o f m i n im um n om i n a l
0.019-inch (0.483 mm) thickness or mineral-surfaced
roll roofing weighing a minimum of 77 pounds per 100
square feet (3.76 kg/m2). Cap flashing shall be corro-
sion-resistant metal of minimum nominal 0.019-inch
(0.483 mm) thickness.
1507.2.9.2 Valleys. Valley linings shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions before

applying shingles. Valley linings of the following types
shall be permitted:

1. For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with
metal, the valley lining shall be at least 24 inches
(610 mm) wide and of any of the corrosion-resis-
tant metals in Table 1507.2.9.2.
2. For open valleys, valley lining of two plies of min-
eral-surfaced roll roofing complying with ASTM
D 3909 or ASTM D 6380 shall be permitted. The
bottom layer shall be 18 inches (457 mm) and the
top layer a minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) wide.
3. For closed valleys (valleys covered with shingles),
valley lining of one ply of smooth roll roofing
complying with ASTM D 6380, and at least 36
inches (914 mm) wide or types as described in
Item 1 or 2 above shall be permitted. Self-adhering
polymer modified bitumen underlayment comply-
ing with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted in lieu
of the lining material.
1507.2.9.3 Drip edge. Provide drip edge at eaves and
gables of shingle roofs. Overlap to be a minimum of 2
inches (51 mm). Eave drip edges shall extend 1/4 inch (6.4
mm) below sheathing and extend back on the roof a mini-
mum of 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edge shall be mechani-
cally fastened a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c.

1507.3 Clay and concrete tile. The installation of clay and
concrete tile shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall
be installed only over solid sheathing or spaced structural
sheathing boards.

1507.3.2 Deck slope. Clay and concrete roof tile shall be
installed on roof slopes of 21/2 units vertical in 12 units hori-
zontal (21-percent slope) or greater. For roof slopes from

MATERIAL

MINIMUM THICKNESS

GAGE

TABLE 1507.2.9.2
VALLEY LINING MATERIAL

Aluminum

Cold-rolled copper

Copper

Galvanized steel

High-yield copper

Lead

Lead-coated copper

Lead-coated high-yield copper

Painted terne

Stainless steel

Zinc alloy

0.024 in.

0.0216 in.

—

0.0179 in.

0.0162 in.

—

0.0216 in.

0.0162 in.

—

—

0.027 in.

—

—

—

26 (zinc-coated G90)

—

—

—

—

—

28

—

WEIGHT

—

ASTM B 370, 16 oz. per square ft.

16 oz

—

ASTM B 370, 12 oz. per square ft.

2.5 pounds

ASTM B 101, 16 oz. per square ft.

ASTM B 101, 12 oz. per square ft.

20 pounds

—

—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 ounce = 28.35 g, 1 square foot = 0.093m2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

291

15_ibc_2009pg291.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, March 06, 2009 8:58:25 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

21/2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21-percent slope) to
four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope),
double underlayment application is required in accordance
with Section 1507.3.3.

1507.3.3 Underlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required
underlayment shall conform to: ASTM D 226, Type II;
ASTM D 2626 or ASTM D 6380, Class M mineral-surfaced
roll roofing.
1507.3.3.1 Low-slope roofs. For roof slopes from 21/2
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21-percent slope),
up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope), underlayment shall be a minimum of two layers
applied as follows:
1. Starting at the eave, a 19-inch (483 mm) strip of
underlayment shall be applied parallel with the
eave and fastened sufficiently in place.
2. Starting at the eave, 36-inch-wide (914 mm) strips
of underlayment felt shall be applied overlapping
successive sheets 19 inches (483 mm) and fas-
tened sufficiently in place.
1507.3.3.2 High-slope roofs. For roof slopes of four
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) or
greater, underlayment shall be a minimum of one layer of
underlayment felt applied shingle fashion, parallel to,
and starting from the eaves and lapped 2 inches (51 mm),
fastened only as necessary to hold in place.

1507.3.4 Clay tile. Clay roof tile shall comply with ASTM
C 1167.

1507.3.5 Concrete tile. Concrete roof tile shall comply
with ASTM C 1492.

1507.3.6 Fasteners. Tile fasteners shall be corrosion resis-
tant and not less than 11 gage, 5/16-inch (8.0 mm) head, and
of sufficient length to penetrate the deck a minimum of 3/4
inch (19.1 mm) or through the thickness of the deck, which-
ever is less. Attaching wire for clay or concrete tile shall not
be smaller than 0.083 inch (2.1 mm). Perimeter fastening
areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches
(914 mm) from either side of hips or ridges and edges of
eaves and gable rakes.

1507.3.7 Attachment. Clay and concrete roof tiles shall be
fastened in accordance with Table 1507.3.7.

1507.3.8 Application. Tile shall be applied according to the
manufacturer’s installation instructions, based on the fol-
lowing:
1. Climatic conditions.
2. Roof slope.
3. Underlayment system.
4. Type of tile being installed.

1507.3.9 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof vertical sur-
faces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch
(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley, or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solid
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.4 Metal roof panels. The installation of metal roof pan-
els shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.4.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof panel roof cover-
ings shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except
where the roof covering is specifically designed to be
applied to spaced supports.
1507.4.2 Deck slope. Minimum slopes for metal roof pan-
els shall comply with the following:
1. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam
metal roofs without applied lap sealant shall be three
units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent
slope).
2. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam
metal roofs with applied lap sealant shall be one-half
unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope).
Lap sealants shall be applied in accordance with the
approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.
3. The minimum slope for standing seam of roof sys-
tems shall be one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units hori-
zontal (2-percent slope).
1507.4.3 Material standards. Metal-sheet roof covering
systems that incorporate supporting structural members
shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 22.
Metal-sheet roof coverings installed over structural decking
shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials used for
metal-sheet roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion
resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accor-
dance with the standards and minimum thicknesses shown
in Table 1507.4.3(2).

292

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:38 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.3.7
CLAY AND CONCRETE TILE ATTACHMENTa, b, c

GENERAL — CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE

Mean roof
height
(feet)

0-60

0-40

> 40-60

Roof slope up to < 3:12

Roof slope 3:12 and over

One fastener per tile. Flat tile
without vertical laps, two
fasteners per tile.

Two fasteners per tile. Only one fastener on slopes of 7:12 and
less for tiles with installed weight exceeding 7.5 lbs./sq. ft.
having a width no greater than 16 inches.

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails. The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofer’s mastic.

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

INTERLOCKING CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE WITH PROJECTING ANCHOR LUGSd, e
(Installations on spaced/solid sheathing with battens or spaced sheathing)

Mean roof
height
(feet)

0-60

0-40

> 40-60

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

Roof slope up to < 5:12

Roof slope 5:12 < 12:12

Roof slope 12:12 and over

Fasteners are not required. Tiles
with installed weight less than 9
lbs./sq. ft. require a minimum of
one fastener per tile.

One fastener per tile every other
row. All perimeter tiles require
one fastener. Tiles with installed
weight less than 9 lbs./sq. ft.
require a minimum of one
fastener per tile.

One fastener required for
every tile. Tiles with installed
weight less than 9 lbs./sq. ft.
require a minimum of one
fastener per tile.

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofers’s mastic.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

INTERLOCKING CLAY OR CONCRETE ROOF TILE WITH PROJECTING ANCHOR LUGS
(Installations on solid sheathing without battens)

Maximum basic
wind speed
(mph)

Mean roof
height
(feet)

All roof slopes

85

100

100

110

120

130

All

0-60

0-40

One fastener per tile.

One fastener per tile.

> 40-60

0-60

0-60

0-60

> 60

The head of all tiles shall be nailed. The nose of all eave tiles shall be fastened with approved
clips. All rake tiles shall be nailed with two nails The nose of all ridge, hip and rake tiles shall be
set in a bead of roofer’s mastic.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

The fastening system shall resist the wind forces in Section 1609.5.3.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square foot = 4.882k g / m 2 .
a. Minimum fastener size. Corrosion-resistant nails not less than No. 11 gage with 5/16-inch head. Fasteners shall be long enough to penetrate into the sheathing 3/4
inch or through the thickness of the sheathing, whichever is less. Attaching wire for clay and concrete tile shall not be smaller than 0.083 inch.
b. Snow areas. A minimum of two fasteners per tile are required or battens and one fastener.
c. Roof slopes greater than 24:12. The nose of all tiles shall be securely fastened.
d. Horizontal battens. Battens shall be not less than 1 inch by 2 inch nominal. Provisions shall be made for drainage by a minimum of 1/8-inch riser at each nail or by
4-foot-long battens with at least a 1/2-inch separation between battens. Horizontal battens are required for slopes over 7:12.
e. Perimeter fastening areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches from either side of hips or ridges and edges of eaves and gable rakes.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

293

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:38 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.4.3(1)
METAL ROOF COVERINGS

ROOF COVERING TYPE

STANDARD APPLICATION
RATE/THICKNESS

Aluminum

ASTM B 209, 0.024 inch minimum
thickness for roll-formed panels and 0.019
inch minimum thickness for press-formed
shingles.

Aluminum-zinc alloy
coated steel

ASTM A 792 AZ 50

Cold-rolled copper

Copper

ASTM B 370 minimum 16 oz./sq. ft. and
12 oz./sq. ft. high yield copper for
metal-sheet roof covering systems:
12 oz/sq. ft. for preformed metal shingle
systems.

16 oz./sq. ft. for metal-sheet roof-covering
systems; 12 oz./sq. ft. for preformed metal
shingle systems.

Galvanized steel

ASTM A 653 G-90 zinc-coateda.

Hard lead

2 lbs./sq. ft.

Lead-coated copper

ASTM B 101

Prepainted steel

ASTM A 755

Soft lead

3 lbs./sq. ft.

Stainless steel

ASTM A 240, 300 Series Alloys

Steel

ASTM A 924

Terne and
terne-coated stainless

Zinc

Terne coating of 40 lbs. per double base
box, field painted where applicable in
accordance with manufacturer’s
installation instructions.

0.027 inch minimum thickness; 99.995%
electrolytic high grade zinc with alloy
additives of copper (0.08% - 0.20%),
titanium (0.07% - 0.12%) and aluminum
(0.015%).

For SI: 1 ounce per square foot = 0.0026 kg/m2,
1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2,
1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
a. For Group U buildings, the minimum coating thickness for ASTM A 653
galvanized steel roofing shall be G-60.

TABLE 1507.4.3(2)
MINIMUM CORROSION RESISTANCE

55% Aluminum-zinc alloy coated steel ASTM A 792 AZ 50

5% Aluminum alloy-coated steel

ASTM A 875 GF60

Aluminum-coated steel

Galvanized steel

Prepainted steel

ASTM A 463 T2 65

ASTM A 653 G-90

ASTM A 755a

a. Paint systems in accordance with ASTM A 755 shall be applied over steel
products with corrosion resistant coatings complying with ASTM A 792,
ASTM A 875, ASTM A 463 or ASTM A 653.

1507.4.4 Attachment. Metal roof panels shall be secured to
the supports in accordance with the approved manufac-
turer’s fasteners. In the absence of manufacturer recommen-
dations, the following fasteners shall be used:
1. Galvanized fasteners shall be used for steel roofs.
2. Copper, brass, bronze, copper alloy or 300 series
stainless-steel fasteners shall be used for copper
roofs.
3. Stainless-steel fasteners are acceptable for all types of
metal roofs.
1507.5 Metal roof shingles. The installation of metal roof
shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.5.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof shingles shall be
applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the
roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to
spaced sheathing.
1507.5.2 Deck slope. Metal roof shingles shall not be
installed on roof slopes below three units vertical in 12 units
horizontal (25-percent slope).
1507.5.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.5.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.5.5 Material standards. Metal roof shingle roof cov-
erings shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials
used for metal-roof shingle roof coverings shall be naturally
corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in
accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses
specified in the standards listed in Table 1507.4.3(2).
1507.5.6 Attachment. Metal roof shingles shall be secured
to the roof in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
1507.5.7 Flashing. Roof valley flashing shall be of corro-
sion-resistant metal of the same material as the roof cover-
ing or shall comply with the standards in Table 1507.4.3(1).
The valley flashing shall extend at least 8 inches (203 mm)
from the centerline each way and shall have a splash diverter
rib not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). In areas
where the average daily temperature in January is 25°F
(-4°C) or less or where there is a possibility of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water, the metal valley
flashing shall have a 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment
directly under
it consisting of either one layer of
underlayment running the full length of the valley or a
self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970, in addition to underlayment required

294

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:39 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

for metal
roof
shingles. The metal valley flashing
underlayment shall be solidly cemented to the roofing
underlayment for roof slopes under seven units vertical in
12 units horizontal (58-percent slope) or self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be installed.
1507.6 Mineral-surfaced roll roofing. The installation of
mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall comply with this section.
1507.6.1 Deck requirements. Mineral-surfaced roll roof-
ing shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.
1507.6.2 Deck slope. Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall
not be applied on roof slopes below one unit vertical in 12
units horizontal (8-percent slope).
1507.6.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.6.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.6.5 Material standards. Mineral-surfaced roll roof-
ing shall conform to ASTM D 3909 or ASTM D 6380.
1507.7 Slate shingles. The installation of slate shingles shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.7.1 Deck requirements. Slate shingles shall be fas-
tened to solidly sheathed roofs.
1507.7.2 Deck slope. Slate shingles shall only be used on
slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12) or
greater.
1507.7.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.7.4 Ice barrier. In areas where the average daily tem-
perature in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a
possibility of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water, an ice barrier that consists of at least two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall extend from the lowest
edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610
mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.7.5 Material standards. Slate shingles shall comply
with ASTM C 406.

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.7.6 Application. Minimum headlap for slate shingles
shall be in accordance with Table 1507.7.6. Slate shingles
shall be secured to the roof with two fasteners per slate.

TABLE 1507.7.6
SLATE SHINGLE HEADLAP

SLOPE

4:12 < slope < 8:12

8:12 < slope < 20:12

slope ³ 20:12

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

HEADLAP
(inches)

4

3

2

1507.7.7 Flashing. Flashing and counterflashing shall be
made with sheet metal. Valley flashing shall be a minimum
of 15 inches (381 mm) wide. Valley and flashing metal shall
be a minimum uncoated thickness of 0.0179-inch (0.455
mm) zinc-coated G90. Chimneys, stucco or brick walls
shall have a minimum of two plies of felt for a cap flashing
consisting of a 4-inch-wide (102 mm) strip of felt set in plas-
tic cement and extending 1 inch (25 mm) above the first felt
and a top coating of plastic cement. The felt shall extend
over the base flashing 2 inches (51 mm).
1507.8 Wood shingles. The installation of wood shingles shall
comply with the provisions of this section and Table 1507.8.
1507.8.1 Deck requirements. Wood shingles shall be
installed on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced
sheathing is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than
1-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimensions
and shall be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure
to coincide with the placement of fasteners.
1507.8.1.1 Solid sheathing required. Solid sheathing is
required in areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of
water.
1507.8.2 Deck slope. Wood shingles shall be installed on
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) or greater.
1507.8.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.8.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

295

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:39 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

TABLE 1507.8
WOOD SHINGLE AND SHAKE INSTALLATION

ROOF ITEM

WOOD SHINGLES

WOOD SHAKES

1. Roof slope

2. Deck requirement

Temperate climate

In areas where the average daily
temperature in January is 25°F or less or
where there is a possibility of ice forming
along the eaves causing a backup of water.

3. Interlayment

4. Underlayment

Temperate climate

In areas where there is a possibility of ice
forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water.

5. Application

Attachment

No. of fasteners

Exposure

Method

Flashing

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, °C = [(°F) - 32]/1.8.

Wood shingles shall be installed on slopes of
three units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(3:12) or greater.

Wood shakes shall be installed on slopes of
four units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(4:12) or greater.

Shingles shall be applied to roofs with solid
or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing
is used, sheathing boards shall not be less
than 1² ´ 4² nominal dimensions and shall be
spaced on center equal to the weather
exposure to coincide with the placement of
fasteners.

Shakes shall be applied to roofs with solid or
spaced sheathing.Where spaced sheathing is
used, sheathing boards shall not be less than
1² ´ 4² nominal dimensions and shall be
spaced on center equal to the weather
exposure to coincide with the placement of
fasteners. When 1² ´ 4² spaced sheathing is
installed at 10 inches, boards must be
installed between the sheathing boards.

Solid sheathing required.

Solid sheathing is required.

No requirements.

Interlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type 1.

An ice barrier that consists of at least two
layers of underlayment cemented together or
of a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen
sheet shall extend from the eave’s edge to a
point at least 24 inches inside the exterior
wall line of the building.

An ice barrier that consists of at least two
layers of underlayment cemented together or
of a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen
sheet shall extend from the lowest edges of all
roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches
inside the exterior wall line of the building.

Fasteners for wood shingles shall be hot-
dipped galvanized or Type 304 (Type 316 for
coastal areas) stainless steel with a minimum
penetration of 0.75 inch into the sheathing.
For sheathing less than 0.5 inch thick, the
fasteners shall extend through the sheathing.

Fasteners for wood shakes shall be hot-dipped
galvanized or Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal
areas) with a minimum penetration of 0.75
inch into the sheathing. For sheathing less
than 0.5 inch thick, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing.

Two per shingle.

Two per shake.

Weather exposures shall not exceed those set
forth in Table 1507.8.7.

Weather exposures shall not exceed those set
forth in Table 1507.9.8.

Shingles shall be laid with a side lap of not
less than 1.5 inches between joints in courses,
and no two joints in any three adjacent
courses shall be in direct alignment. Spacing
between shingles shall be 0.25 to 0.375 inch.

Shakes shall be laid with a side lap of not less
than 1.5 inches between joints in adjacent
courses. Spacing between shakes shall not be
less than 0.375 inch or more than 0.625 inch
for shakes and taper sawn shakes of naturally
durable wood and shall be 0.25 to 0.375 inch
for preservative-treated taper sawn shakes.

In accordance with Section 1507.8.8.

In accordance with Section 1507.9.9.

296

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009pg296.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:27:50 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1507.8.5 Material standards. Wood shingles shall be of
naturally durable wood and comply with the requirements
of Table 1507.8.5.

TABLE 1507.8.5
WOOD SHINGLE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL

APPLICABLE
MINIMUM GRADES GRADING RULES

Wood shingles of naturally
durable wood

1, 2 or 3

CSSB

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

1507.8.6 Attachment. Fasteners for wood shingles shall be
corrosion resistant with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch
(19.1 mm) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) in thickness, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing. Each shingle shall be attached with a
minimum of two fasteners.

1507.8.7 Application. Wood shingles shall be laid with a
side lap not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between joints in
adjacent courses, and not be in direct alignment in alternate
courses. Spacing between shingles shall be 1/4 to 3/8 inches
(6.4 to 9.5 mm). Weather exposure for wood shingles shall
not exceed that set in Table 1507.8.7.

TABLE 1507.8.7
WOOD SHINGLE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE

ROOFING MATERIAL

LENGTH
(inches)

GRADE

3:12 pitch
to < 4:12

4:12 pitch
or steeper

EXPOSURE (inches)

Shingles of naturally
durable wood

16

18

24

No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3

3.75
3.5
3
4.25
4
3.5
5.75
5.5
5

5
4
3.5
5.5
4.5
4
7.5
6.5
5.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1507.8.8 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof and vertical
surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch
(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solidly
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.9 Wood shakes. The installation of wood shakes shall
comply with the provisions of this section and Table 1507.8.
1507.9.1 Deck requirements. Wood shakes shall only be
used on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing
is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than 1-inch by
4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimensions and shall
be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure to coin-
cide with the placement of fasteners. Where 1-inch by
4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) spaced sheathing is installed at
10 inches (254 mm) o.c., additional 1-inch by 4-inch (25
mm by 102 mm) boards shall be installed between the
sheathing boards.
1507.9.1.1 Solid sheathing required. Solid sheathing is
required in areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of
water.
1507.9.2 Deck slope. Wood shakes shall only be used on
slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-per-
cent slope) or greater.
1507.9.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869.
1507.9.4 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history
of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water, an
ice barrier
that consists of at
least
two layers of
underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering poly-
mer-modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal
underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof
surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the
exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that contain
no conditioned floor area.
1507.9.5 Interlayment. Interlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

297

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.9.6 Material standards. Wood shakes shall comply
with the requirements of Table 1507.9.6.

TABLE 1507.9.6
WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL

Wood shakes of naturally durable wood
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable
wood
Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of
naturally durable wood
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and shingles
of naturally durable wood
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of
Southern pine treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Use Category 3B and Section 5.6)

MINIMUM
GRADES

APPLICABLE
GRADING
RULES

1

1 or 2

1

1

CSSB

CSSB

CSSB

CSSB

1 or 2

TFS

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau.
TFS = Forest Products Laboratory of the Texas Forest Services.

1507.9.7 Attachment. Fasteners for wood shakes shall be
corrosion resistant with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch
(19.1 mm) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 1/2
inch (12.7 mm) in thickness, the fasteners shall extend
through the sheathing. Each shake shall be attached with a
minimum of two fasteners.
1507.9.8 Application. Wood shakes shall be laid with a side
lap not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between joints in adja-
cent courses. Spacing between shakes in the same course
shall be 3/8 to 5/8 inches (9.5 to 15.9 mm) for shakes and taper
sawn shakes of naturally durable wood and shall be 1/4 to 3/8
inch (6.4 to 9.5 mm) for preservative taper sawn shakes.
Weather exposure for wood shakes shall not exceed those
set in Table 1507.9.8.

TABLE 1507.9.8
WOOD SHAKE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE

ROOFING MATERIAL

Shakes of naturally
durable wood

Preservative-treated taper
sawn shakes of Southern
yellow pine

Taper sawn shakes of
naturally durable wood

LENGTH
(inches)

GRADE

EXPOSURE
(inches)
4:12 PITCH
OR STEEPER

18
24

18
24

18
24

18
24

18
24

No. 1
No. 1

No. 1
No. 1

No. 2
No. 2

No. 1
No. 1

No. 2
No. 2

7.5
10a

7.5
10

5.5
7.5

7.5
10

5.5
7.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. For 24-inch by 0.375-inch handsplit shakes, the maximum exposure is 7.5
inches.

1507.9.9 Flashing. At the juncture of the roof and vertical
surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instruc-
tions, and where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019-inch

(0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resis-
tant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches
(279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash
diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line
formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall
have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof
slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per-
cent slope) and over, the valley flashing shall have a
36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of either one layer of
Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley or
a self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet complying
with ASTM D 1970,
in addition to other
required
underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature
in January is 25°F (-4°C) or less or where there is a possibil-
ity of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water,
the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solidly
cemented to the roofing underlayment for slopes under
seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope)
or self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen sheet shall be
installed.
1507.10 Built-up roofs. The installation of built-up roofs shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
1507.10.1 Slope. Built-up roofs shall have a design slope of
a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal
(2-percent slope) for drainage, except for coal-tar built-up
roofs that shall have a design slope of a minimum
one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent
slope).
1507.10.2 Material standards. Built-up roof covering
materials shall comply with the standards in Table
1507.10.2.
1507.11 Modified bitumen roofing. The installation of modi-
fied bitumen roofing shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
1507.11.1 Slope. Modified bitumen membrane roofs shall
have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.
1507.11.2 Material standards. Modified bitumen roof
coverings shall comply with CGSB 37-GP-56M, ASTM D
6162, ASTM D 6163, ASTM D 6164, ASTM D 6222,
ASTM D 6223, ASTM D 6298 or ASTM D 6509.
1507.12 Thermoset single-ply roofing. The installation of
thermoset single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions
of this section.
1507.12.1 Slope. Thermoset single-ply membrane roofs
shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit
vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drain-
age.
1507.12.2 Material standards. Thermoset single-ply roof
coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4637, ASTM D 5019
or CGSB 37-GP-52M.
1507.12.3 Ballasted thermoset low-slope roofs. Ballasted
thermoset low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) shall be
installed in accordance with this section and Section 1504.4.
Stone used as ballast shall comply with ASTM D 448.

298

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1507.10.2
BUILT-UP ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL STANDARD

STANDARD

Acrylic coatings used in roofing

ASTM D 6083

Aggregate surfacing

ASTM D 1863

Asphalt adhesive used in roofing

ASTM D 3747

Asphalt cements used in roofing

ASTM D 3019; D 2822;
D 4586

Asphalt-coated glass fiber base sheet ASTM D 4601

Asphalt coatings used in roofing

ASTM D1227; D 2823;
D 4479

Asphalt glass felt

ASTM D 2178

Asphalt primer used in roofing

ASTM D 41

Asphalt-saturated and asphalt-coated
organic felt base sheet

ASTM D 2626

Asphalt-saturated organic felt
(perforated)

Asphalt used in roofing

ASTM D 226

ASTM D 312

Coal-tar cements used in roofing

ASTM D 4022; D 5643

Coal-tar saturated organic felt

ASTM D 227

Coal-tar pitch used in roofing

ASTM D 450; Type I or II

Coal-tar primer used in roofing,
dampproofing and waterproofing

Glass mat, coal tar

Glass mat, venting type

ASTM D 43

ASTM D 4990

ASTM D 4897

Mineral-surfaced inorganic cap sheet ASTM D 3909

Thermoplastic fabrics used in
roofing

ASTM D 5665, D 5726

1507.13 Thermoplastic single-ply roofing. The installation
of thermoplastic single-ply roofing shall comply with the pro-
visions of this section.

1507.13.1 Slope. Thermoplastic single-ply membrane
roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth
unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

1507.13.2 Material standards. Thermoplastic single-ply
roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4434, ASTM D
6754, ASTM D 6878 or CGSB CAN/CGSB 37-54.

1507.13.3 Ballasted thermoplastic low-slope roofs. Bal-
lasted thermoplastic low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12)
shall be installed in accordance with this section and Section
1504.4. Stone used as ballast shall comply with ASTM
D448.

1507.14 Sprayed polyurethane foam roofing. The installa-
tion of sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall comply with
the provisions of this section.

1507.14.1 Slope. Sprayed polyurethane foam roofs shall
have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1507.14.2 Material standards. Spray-applied polyure-
thane foam insulation shall comply with Type III or IV as
defined in ASTM C 1029.
1507.14.3 Application. Foamed-in-place roof insulation
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions. A liquid-applied protective coating that com-
plies with Section 1507.15 shall be applied no less than 2
hours nor more than 72 hours following the application of
the foam.
1507.14.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastic materials and instal-
lation shall comply with Chapter 26.
1507.15 Liquid-applied coatings. The installation of liq-
uid-applied coatings shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
1507.15.1 Slope. Liquid-applied roofs shall have a design
slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units
horizontal (2-percent slope).
1507.15.2 Material standards. Liquid-applied roof coat-
ings shall comply with ASTM C 836, ASTM C 957, ASTM
D 1227 or ASTM D 3468, ASTM D 6083, ASTM D 6694 or
ASTM D 6947.
1507.16 Roof gardens and landscaped roofs. Roof gardens
and landscaped roofs shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter and Sections 1607.11.2.2 and 1607.11.3.

SECTION 1508
ROOF INSULATION

1508.1 General. The use of above-deck thermal insulation
shall be permitted provided such insulation is covered with an
approved roof covering and passes the tests of FM 4450 or UL
1256 when tested as an assembly.
Exceptions:
1. Foam plastic roof insulation shall conform to the
material and installation requirements of Chapter 26.
2. W h e r e a c o n c r e t e r o o f d e c k i s u s e d a n d th e
above-deck thermal insulation is covered with an
approved roof covering.
1508.1.1 Cellulosic fiberboard. Cellulosic fiberboard roof
insulation shall conform to the material and installation
requirements of Chapter 23.
1508.2 Material standards. Above-deck thermal insulation
board shall comply with the standards in Table 1508.2.

TABLE 1508.2
MATERIAL STANDARDS FOR ROOF INSULATION

Cellular glass board

ASTM C 552

Composite boards

ASTM C 1289, Type III, IV, V or VI

Expanded polystyrene

ASTM C 578

Extruded polystyrene board ASTM C 578

Perlite board

ASTM C 728

Polyisocyanurate board

ASTM C 1289, Type I or Type II

Wood fiberboard

ASTM C 208

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

299

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:40 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

SECTION 1509
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

1509.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
construction of rooftop structures.
1509.2 Penthouses. A penthouse or penthouses in compliance
with Sections 1509.2.1 through 1509.2.4 shall be considered as
a portion of the story below.
1509.2.1 Height above roof. A penthouse or other projec-
tion above the roof in structures of other than Type I con-
struction shall not exceed 28 feet (8534 mm) above the roof
where used as an enclosure for tanks or for elevators that run
to the roof and in all other cases shall not extend more than
18 feet (5486 mm) above the roof.
1509.2.2 Area limitation. The aggregate area of pent-
houses and other rooftop structures shall not exceed
one-third the area of the supporting roof. Such penthouses
shall not contribute to either the building area or number of
stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the
penthouse shall not be included in determining the fire area
defined in Section 902.
1509.2.3 Use limitations. A penthouse, bulkhead or any
other similar projection above the roof shall not be used for
purposes other than shelter of mechanical equipment or
shelter of vertical shaft openings in the roof. Provisions such
as louvers, louver blades or flashing shall be made to protect
the mechanical equipment and the building interior from the
elements. Penthouses or bulkheads used for purposes other
than permitted by this section shall conform to the require-
ments of this code for an additional story. The restrictions of
this section shall not prohibit the placing of wood flagpoles
or similar structures on the roof of any building.
1509.2.4 Type of construction. Penthouses shall be con-
structed with walls, floors and roof as required for the build-
ing.
Exceptions:
1. On buildings of Type I construction, the exterior
walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separa-
tion distance of more than 5 feet (1524 mm) and
less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be of at least
1-hour fire resistance-rated noncombustible con-
struction. Walls and roofs with a fire separation
distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall be of
noncombustible construction. Interior framing
and walls shall be of noncombustible construction.
2. On buildings of Type I construction two stories
above grade plane or less in height and Type II
construction, the exterior walls and roofs of pent-
houses with a fire separation distance of more than
5 feet (1524 mm) and less than 20 feet (6096 mm)
shall be of at least 1-hour fire-resistance-rated
noncombustible or fire-retardant-treated wood
construction. Walls and roofs with a fire separa-
tion distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall
be of noncombustible or fire-retardant-treated
wood construction. Interior framing and walls

shall be of noncombustible or fire retardant-
treated wood construction.
3. On buildings of Type III, IV and V construction,
the exterior walls of penthouses with a fire separa-
tion distance of more than 5 feet (1524 mm) and
less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be at least 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction. Walls with a
fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or
greater from a common property line shall be of
Type IV construction or noncombustible, or
fire-retardant-treated wood construction. Roofs
shall be constructed of materials and fire-resis-
tance rated as required in Table 601 and Section
603, Item 25.3. Interior framing and walls shall be
Type IV cons truc t ion o r noncombus t ib le o r
fire-retardant-treated wood construction.
4. On buildings of Type I construction, unprotected
noncombustible enclosures housing only mechan-
ical equipment and located with a minimum fire
separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be
permitted.
5. On buildings of Type I construction two stories or
less above grade plane in height, or Type II, III, IV
and V construction, unprotected noncombustible
or fire-retardant-treated wood enclosures housing
only mechanical equipment and located with a
minimum fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096
mm) shall be permitted.
6. On one-story buildings, combustible unroofed
mechanical equipment screens, fences or similar
enclosures are permitted where located with a fire
separation distance of at least 20 feet (6096 mm)
from ad jacen t proper ty l ines and where no t
exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) in height above the
roof surface.
7. Dormers shall be of the same type of construction
as the roof on which they are placed, or of the exte-
rior walls of the building.
1509.3 Tanks. Tanks having a capacity of more than 500 gal-
lons (2 m3) placed in or on a building shall be supported on
masonry, reinforced concrete, steel or Type IV construction
provided that, where such supports are located in the building
above the lowest story, the support shall be fire-resistance rated
as required for Type IA construction.
1509.3.1 Valve. Such tanks shall have in the bottom or on
the side near the bottom, a pipe or outlet, fitted with a suit-
able quick opening valve for discharging the contents in an
emergency through an adequate drain.
1509.3.2 Location. Such tanks shall not be placed over or
near a line of stairs or an elevator shaft, unless there is a solid
roof or floor underneath the tank.
1509.3.3 Tank cover. Unenclosed roof tanks shall have cov-
ers sloping toward the outer edges.
1509.4 Cooling towers. Cooling towers in excess of 250
square feet (23.2 m2) in base area or in excess of 15 feet (4572

300

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

14

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

of roof coverings down to the roof deck where any of the fol-
lowing conditions occur:
1. Where the existing roof or roof covering is water soaked
or has deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or
roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional
roofing.
2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate,
clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. Where the existing roof has two or more applications of
any type of roof covering.
Exceptions:
1. Complete and separate roofing systems, such as
standing-seam metal roof systems, that are designed
to transmit the roof loads directly to the building’s
structural system and that do not rely on existing roofs
and roof coverings for support, shall not require the
removal of existing roof coverings.
2. Metal panel, metal shingle and concrete and clay tile
roof coverings shall be permitted to be installed over
existing wood shake roofs when applied in accor-
dance with Section 1510.4.
3. The application of a new protective coating over an
existing spray polyurethane foam roofing system
shall be permitted without tear-off of existing roof
coverings.
1510.4 Roof recovering. Where the application of a new roof
covering over wood shingle or shake roofs creates a combusti-
ble concealed space, the entire existing surface shall be covered
with gypsum board, mineral fiber, glass fiber or other approved
materials securely fastened in place.
1510.5 Reinstallation of materials. Existing slate, clay or
cement tile shall be permitted for reinstallation, except that
damaged, cracked or broken slate or tile shall not be reinstalled.
Existing vent flashing, metal edgings, drain outlets, collars and
metal counterflashings shall not be reinstalled where rusted,
damaged or deteriorated. Aggregate surfacing materials shall
not be reinstalled.
1510.6 Flashings. Flashings shall be reconstructed in accor-
dance with approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Metal flashing to which bituminous materials are to be adhered
shall be primed prior to installation.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

mm) high where located on building roofs more than 50 feet
(15 240 mm) high shall be of noncombustible construction.
Cooling towers shall not exceed one-third of the supporting
roof area.
Exception: Drip boards and the enclosing construction of
wood not less than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, pro-
vided the wood is covered on the exterior of the tower with
noncombustible material.
1509.5 Towers, spires, domes and cupolas. Any tower, spire,
dome or cupola shall be of a type of construction not less in
fire-resistance rating than required for the building to which it
is attached, except that any such tower, spire, dome or cupola
that exceeds 85 feet (25 908 mm) in height above grade plane,
exceeds 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in horizontal area or is used
for any purpose other than a belfry or an architectural embel-
lishment shall be constructed of and supported on Type I or II
construction.
1509.5.1 Noncombustible construction required. Any
tower, spire, dome or cupola that exceeds 60 feet (18 288
mm) in height above the highest point at which it comes in
contact with the roof, or that exceeds 200 square feet (18.6
m2) in area at any horizontal section, or which is intended to
be used for any purpose other than a belfry or architectural
embellishment, shall be entirely constructed of and sup-
ported by noncombustible materials. Such structures shall
be separated from the building below by construction hav-
ing a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5 hours with
openings protected with a minimum 1.5-hour fire protection
rating. Structures, except aerial supports 12 feet (3658 mm)
high or less, flagpoles, water tanks and cooling towers,
placed above the roof of any building more than 50 feet (15
240 mm) in building height, shall be of noncombustible
material and shall be supported by construction of
noncombustible material.
1509.5.2 Towers and spires. Towers and spires where
enclosed shall have exterior walls as required for the build-
ing to which they are attached. The roof covering of spires
shall be of a class of roof covering as required for the main
roof of the rest of the structure.

SECTION 1510
REROOFING

1510.1 General. Materials and methods of application used for
recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply
with the requirements of Chapter 15.
Exception: Reroofing shall not be required to meet the min-
imum design slope requirement of one-quarter unit vertical
in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in Section 1507 for
roofs that provide positive roof drainage.
1510.2 Structural and construction loads. Structural roof
components shall be capable of supporting the roof-covering
system and the material and equipment loads that will be
encountered during installation of the system.
1510.3 Recovering versus replacement. New roof coverings
shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

301

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

302

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

15_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:13)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 8:27:41 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 16

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

➡

SECTION 1601
GENERAL

1601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
structural design of buildings, structures and portions thereof
regulated by this code.

SECTION 1602
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

1602.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. A method of proportion-
ing structural members, such that elastically computed stresses
produced in the members by nominal loads do not exceed spec-
ified allowable stresses (also called “working stress design”).
DEAD LOADS. The weight of materials of construction
incorporated into the building, including but not limited to
walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, fin-
ishes, cladding and other similarly incorporated architectural
and structural items, and the weight of fixed service equipment,
such as cranes, plumbing stacks and risers, electrical feeders,
h e a t ing , ven t i l a t ing and a i r- cond i t ion ing sy s t em s and
automatic sprinkler systems.
DESIGN STRENGTH. The product of the nominal strength
and a resistance factor (or strength reduction factor).
DIAPHRAGM. A horizontal or sloped system acting to trans-
mit lateral forces to the vertical-resisting elements. When the
term “diaphragm” is used, it shall include horizontal bracing
systems.
Diaphragm, blocked. In light-frame construction, a dia-
phragm in which all sheathing edges not occurring on a
framing member are supported on and fastened to blocking.
Diaphragm boundary. In light-frame construction, a loca-
tion where shear is transferred into or out of the diaphragm
sheathing. Transfer is either to a boundary element or to
another force-resisting element.
Diaphragm chord. A diaphragm boundary element per-
pendicular to the applied load that is assumed to take axial
stresses due to the diaphragm moment.
Diaphragm flexible. A diaphragm is flexible for the pur-
pose of distribution of story shear and torsional moment
where so indicated in Section 12.3.1 of ASCE 7, as modified
in Section 1613.6.1.
Diaphragm, rigid. A diaphragm is rigid for the purpose of
distribution of story shear and torsional moment when the
lateral deformation of the diaphragm is less than or equal to
two times the average story drift.
DURATION OF LOAD. The period of continuous applica-
tion of a given load, or the aggregate of periods of intermittent
applications of the same load.

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. Buildings and other structures
that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme
environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes.
FABRIC PARTITION. A partition consisting of a finished
surface made of fabric, without a continuous rigid backing, that
is directly attached to a framing system in which the vertical
framing members are spaced greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) on
center.
FACTORED LOAD. The product of a nominal load and a load
factor.
GUARD. See Section 1002.1.
IMPACT LOAD. The load resulting from moving machinery,
elevators, craneways, vehicles and other similar forces and
kinetic loads, pressure and possible surcharge from fixed or
moving loads.
LIMIT STATE. A condition beyond which a structure or
member becomes unfit for service and is judged to be no longer
useful for its intended function (serviceability limit state) or to
be unsafe (strength limit state).
LIVE LOADS. Those loads produced by the use and occu-
pancy of the building or other structure and do not include con-
struction or environmental loads such as wind load, snow load,
rain load, earthquake load, flood load or dead load.
LIVE LOADS (ROOF). Those loads produced (1) during
maintenance by workers, equipment and materials; and (2)
during the life of the structure by movable objects such as
planters and by people.
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD). A
method of proportioning structural members and their connec-
tions using load and resistance factors such that no applicable
limit state is reached when the structure is subjected to appro-
priate load combinations. The term “LRFD” is used in the
design of steel and wood structures.
LOAD EFFECTS. Forces and deformations produced in
structural members by the applied loads.
LOAD FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the
actual load from the nominal load, for uncertainties in the anal-
ysis that transforms the load into a load effect, and for the prob-
a b i l i t y t h a t m o r e t h a n o n e ex t r em e l o a d w i l l o c c u r
simultaneously.
LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of
building materials, occupants and their possessions, environ-
mental effects, differential movement and restrained dimen-
sional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in which
variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as
dead loads. All other loads are variable loads (see also “Nomi-
nal loads”).
NOMINAL LOADS. The magnitudes of the loads specified in
this chapter (dead, live, soil, wind, snow, rain, flood and earth-
quake).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

303

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:30 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

OCCUPANCY CATEGORY. A category used to determine
structural requirements based on occupancy.
OTHER STRUCTURES. Structures, other than buildings,
for which loads are specified in this chapter.
PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). The section of a floor,
wall or roof comprised between the supporting frame of two
adjacent rows of columns and girders or column bands of floor
or roof construction.
RESISTANCE FACTOR. A factor that accounts for devia-
tions of the actual strength from the nominal strength and the
manner and consequences of failure (also called “strength
reduction factor”).
STRENGTH, NOMINAL. The capacity of a structure or
member to resist the effects of loads, as determined by compu-
tations using specified material strengths and dimensions and
equations derived from accepted principles of structural
mechanics or by field tests or laboratory tests of scaled models,
allowing for modeling effects and differences between labora-
tory and field conditions.
STRENGTH, REQUIRED. Strength of a member, cross sec-
tion or connection required to resist factored loads or related
internal moments and forces in such combinations as stipulated
by these provisions.
STRENGTH DESIGN. A method of proportioning structural
members such that the computed forces produced in the mem-
bers by factored loads do not exceed the member design
strength [also called “load and resistance factor design”
(LRFD)]. The term “strength design” is used in the design of
concrete and masonry structural elements.
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEM. A system of building com-
ponents near open sides of a garage floor or ramp or building
walls that act as restraints for vehicles.
NOTATIONS.
D = Dead load.
E = C om b i n e d e f f e c t o f h o r i z o n t a l a n d v e r t i c a l
earthquake induced forces as defined in Section
12.4.2 of ASCE 7.
F = Load due to fluids with well-defined pressures and
maximum heights.
Fa = Flood load in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7.
H = Load due to lateral earth pressures, ground water
pressure or pressure of bulk materials.
L = Live load, except roof live load, including any per-
mitted live load reduction.
Lr = Roof live load including any permitted live load
reduction.
R = Rain load.
S = Snow load.
T = Self-straining force arising from contraction or
expansion resu lting from temperature change,
shrinkage, moisture change, creep in component

➡

materials, movement due to differential settlement
or combinations thereof.
W = Load due to wind pressure.

SECTION 1603
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

1603.1 General. Construction documents shall show the size,
section and relative locations of structural members with floor
levels, column centers and offsets dimensioned. The design
loads and other information pertinent to the structural design
required by Sections 1603.1.1 through 1603.1.9 shall be indi-
cated on the construction documents.
Exception: Construction documents for buildings con-
structed in accordance with the conventional light-frame
construction provisions of Section 2308 shall indicate the
following structural design information:
1. Floor and roof live loads.
2. Ground snow load, Pg.
3. Basic wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour
(mph) (km/hr) and wind exposure.
4. Seismic design category and site class.
5. Flood design data, if located in flood hazard areas
established in Section 1612.3.
6. Design load-bearing values of soils.
1603.1.1 Floor live load. The uniformly distributed, con-
centrated and impact floor live load used in the design shall
be indicated for floor areas. Use of live load reduction in
accordance with Section 1607.9 shall be indicated for each
type of live load used in the design.
1603.1.2 Roof live load. The roof live load used in the
design shall be indicated for roof areas (Section 1607.11).
1603.1.3 Roof snow load. The ground snow load, Pg, shall
be indicated. In areas where the ground snow load, Pg,
exceeds 10 pounds per square foot (psf) (0.479 kN/m2), the
following additional information shall also be provided,
regardless of whether snow loads govern the design of the
roof:
1. Flat-roof snow load, Pf.
2. Snow exposure factor, Ce.
3. Snow load importance factor, I.
4. Thermal factor, Ct.
1603.1.4 Wind design data. The following information
related to wind loads shall be shown, regardless of whether
wind loads govern the design of the lateral-force-resisting
system of the building:
1. Basic wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour
(km/hr).
2. Wind importance factor, I, and occupancy category.
3. Wind exposure. Where more than one wind exposure
is utilized, the wind exposure and applicable wind
direction shall be indicated.

304

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:30 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

4. The applicable internal pressure coefficient.
5. Components and cladding. The design wind pres-
sures in terms of psf (kN/m2) to be used for the design
of exterior component and cladding materials not spe-
cifically designed by the registered design profes-
sional.

1603.1.5 Earthquake design data. The following informa-
tion related to seismic loads shall be shown, regardless of
whether seismic loads govern the design of the lat-
eral-force-resisting system of the building:
1. Seismic importance factor, I, and occupancy cate-
gory.
2. Mapped spectral response accelerations, SS and S1.
3. Site class.
4. Spectral response coefficients, SDS and SD1.
5. Seismic design category.
6. Basic seismic-force-resisting system(s).
7. Design base shear.
8. Seismic response coefficient(s), CS.
9. Response modification factor(s), R.
10. Analysis procedure used.
1603.1.6 Geotechnical information. The design load-
bearing values of soils shall be shown on the construction
documents.
1603.1.7 Flood design data. For buildings located in whole
or in part in flood hazard areas as established in Section
1612.3, the documentation pertaining to design, if required
in Section 1612.5, shall be included and the following infor-
mation, referenced to the datum on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), shall be shown, regardless of
whether flood loads govern the design of the building:
1. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity
wave action, the elevation of the proposed lowest
floor, including the basement.
2. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity
wave action, the elevation to which any nonresiden-
tial building will be dry floodproofed.
3. In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action, the proposed elevation of the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest
floor, including the basement.
1603.1.8 Special loads. Special loads that are applicable to
the design of the building, structure or portions thereof shall
be indicated along with the specified section of this code
that addresses the special loading condition.
1603.1.9 Systems and components requiring special
inspections for seismic resistance. Construction docu-
ments or specifications shall be prepared for those systems
and components requiring special inspection for seismic
resistance as specified in Section 1707.1 by the registered
design professional responsible for their design and shall be
submitted for approval in accordance with Section 107.1.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

Reference to seismic standards in lieu of detailed drawings
is acceptable.

➡

SECTION 1604
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

1604.1 General. Building, structures and parts thereof shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with strength design,
load and resistance factor design, allowable stress design,
empirical design or conventional construction methods, as per-
mitted by the applicable material chapters.
1604.2 Strength. Buildings and other structures, and parts
thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the
factored loads in load combinations defined in this code with-
out exceeding the appropriate strength limit states for the mate-
rials of construction. Alternatively, buildings and other
structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed
to support safely the nominal loads in load combinations
defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate speci-
fied allowable stresses for the materials of construction.
Loads and forces for occupancies or uses not covered in this
chapter shall be subject to the approval of the building official.
1604.3 Serviceability. Structural systems and members
thereof shall be designed to have adequate stiffness to limit
deflections and lateral drift. See Section 12.12.1 of ASCE 7 for
drift limits applicable to earthquake loading.
1604.3.1 Deflections. The deflections of structural mem-
bers shall not exceed the more restrictive of the limitations
of Sections 1604.3.2 through 1604.3.5 or that permitted by
Table 1604.3.

TABLE 1604.3
DEFLECTION LIMITSa, b, c, h, i

CONSTRUCTION

L

S or W f D + Ld, g

Roof members:e
Supporting plaster ceiling
Supporting nonplaster ceiling
Not supporting ceiling

Floor members

Exterior walls and interior partitions:
With brittle finishes
With flexible finishes

Farm buildings

Greenhouses

l/360
l/240
l/180

l/360

—
—

—

—

l/360
l/240
l/180

—

l/240
l/120

—

—

l/240
l/180
l/120

l/240

—
—

l/180

l/120

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. For structural roofing and siding made of formed metal sheets, the total load
deflection shall not exceed l/60. For secondary roof structural members sup-
porting formed metal roofing, the live load deflection shall not exceed l/150.
For secondary wall members supporting formed metal siding, the design
wind load deflection shall not exceed l/90. For roofs, this exception only
applies when the metal sheets have no roof covering.
b. Interior partitions not exceeding 6 feet in height and flexible, folding and
portable partitions are not governed by the provisions of this section. The
deflection criterion for interior partitions is based on the horizontal load
defined in Section 1607.13.
c. See Section 2403 for glass supports.

(Table notes continued)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

305

16_ibc_2009pg305.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:33:15 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

d. For wood structural members having a moisture content of less than 16 per-
cent at time of installation and used under dry conditions, the deflection
resulting from L + 0.5D is permitted to be substituted for the deflection
resulting from L + D.
e. The above deflections do not ensure against ponding. Roofs that do not have
sufficient slope or camber to assure adequate drainage shall be investigated
for ponding. See Section 1611 for rain and ponding requirements and Sec-
tion 1503.4 for roof drainage requirements.
f. The wind load is permitted to be taken as 0.7 times the “component and clad-
ding” loads for the purpose of determining deflection limits herein.
g. For steel structural members, the dead load shall be taken as zero.
h. For aluminum structural members or aluminum panels used in skylights and
sloped glazing framing, roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers,
not supporting edge of glass or aluminum sandwich panels, the total load
deflection shall not exceed l/60. For continuous aluminum structural mem-
bers supporting edge of glass, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/175
for each glass lite or l/60 for the entire length of the member, whichever is
more stringent. For aluminum sandwich panels used in roofs or walls of sun-
room additions or patio covers, the total load deflection shall not exceed
l/120.
i. For cantilever members, l shall be taken as twice the length of the cantilever.

1604.3.2 Reinforced concrete. The deflection of rein-
forced concrete structural members shall not exceed that
permitted by ACI 318.
1604.3.3 Steel. The deflection of steel structural members
shall not exceed that permitted by AISC 360, AISI S100,
ASCE 3, ASCE 8, SJI CJ-1.0, SJI JG-1.1, SJI K-1.1 or SJI
LH/DLH-1.1, as applicable.
1604.3.4 Masonry. The deflection of masonry structural
members shall not exceed that permitted by TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
1604.3.5 Aluminum. The deflection of aluminum struc-
tural members shall not exceed that permitted by AA
ADM1.
1604.3.6 Limits. Deflection of structural members over
span, l, shall not exceed that permitted by Table 1604.3.
1604.4 Analysis. Load effects on structural members and their
connections shall be determined by methods of structural anal-
ysis that take into account equilibrium, general stability, geo-
metric compatibility and both short- and long-term material
properties.
Members that tend to accumulate residual deformations
under repeated service loads shall have included in their analy-
sis the added eccentricities expected to occur during their ser-
vice life.
Any system or method of construction to be used shall be
based on a rational analysis in accordance with well-estab-
lished principles of mechanics. Such analysis shall result in a
system that provides a complete load path capable of transfer-
ring loads from their point of origin to the load-resisting ele-
ments.
The total lateral force shall be distributed to the various verti-
cal elements of the lateral-force-resisting system in proportion
to their rigidities, considering the rigidity of the horizontal
bracing system or diaphragm. Rigid elements assumed not to
be a part of the lateral-force-resisting system are permitted to
be incorporated into buildings provided their effect on the
action of the system is considered and provided for in the
design. Except where diaphragms are flexible, or are permitted
to be analyzed as flexible, provisions shall be made for the
increased forces induced on resisting elements of the structural

system resulting from torsion due to eccentricity between the
center of application of the lateral forces and the center of rigid-
ity of the lateral-force-resisting system.
Every structure shall be designed to resist the overturning
effects caused by the lateral forces specified in this chapter. See
Section 1609 for wind loads, Section 1610 for lateral soil loads
and Section 1613 for earthquake loads.
1604.5 Occupancy category. Each building and structure
shall be assigned an occupancy category in accordance with
Table 1604.5.
1604.5.1 Multiple occupancies. Where a building or struc-
ture is occupied by two or more occupancies not included in
the same occupancy category, it shall be assigned the classi-
fication of the highest occupancy category corresponding to
the various occupancies. Where buildings or structures have
two or more portions that are structurally separated, each
portion shall be separately classified. Where a separated
portion of a building or structure provides required access
to, required egress from or shares life safety components
with another portion having a higher occupancy category,
both portions shall be assigned to the higher occupancy cat-
egory.
1604.6 In-situ load tests. The building official is authorized to
require an engineering analysis or a load test, or both, of any
construction whenever there is reason to question the safety of
the construction for the intended occupancy. Engineering anal-
ysis and load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Sec-
tion 1714.
1604.7 Preconstruction load tests. Materials and methods of
construction that are not capable of being designed by
approved engineering analysis or that do not comply with the
applicable material design standards listed in Chapter 35, or
alternative test procedures in accordance with Section 1712,
shall be load tested in accordance with Section 1715.
1604.8 Anchorage.
1604.8.1 General. Anchorage of the roof to walls and col-
umns, and of walls and columns to foundations, shall be
provided to resist the uplift and sliding forces that result
from the application of the prescribed loads.
1604.8.2 Walls. Walls shall be anchored to floors, roofs and
other structural elements that provide lateral support for the
wall. Such anchorage shall provide a positive direct connec-
tion capable of resisting the horizontal forces specified in
this chapter but not less than the minimum strength design
horizontal force specified in Section 11.7.3 of ASCE 7, sub-
stituted for “E” in the load combinations of Section 1605.2
or 1605.3. Concrete and masonry walls shall be designed to
resist bending between anchors where the anchor spacing
exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm). Required anchors in masonry
walls of hollow units or cavity walls shall be embedded in a
reinforced grouted structural element of the wall. See Sec-
tions 1609 for wind design requirements and 1613 for earth-
quake design requirements.
1604.8.3 Decks. Where supported by attachment to an exte-
rior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary
structure and designed for both vertical and lateral loads as
applicable. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by

306

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg306.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:56:59 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where
positive connection to the primary building structure cannot
be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-support-
ing. Connections of decks with cantilevered framing mem-
bers to exterior walls or other framing members shall be
designed for both of the following:

1. The reactions resulting from the dead load and live
load specified in Table 1607.1, or the snow load spec-
ified in Section 1608, in accordance with Section
1605, acting on all portions of the deck.
2. The reactions resulting from the dead load and live
load specified in Table 1607.1, or the snow load spec-
ified in Section 1608, in accordance with Section
1605, acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck,

and no live load or snow load on the remaining por-
tion of the deck.
1604.9 Counteracting structural actions. Structural mem-
bers, systems, components and cladding shall be designed to
resist forces due to earthquake and wind, with consideration of
overturning, sliding and uplift. Continuous load paths shall be
provided for transmitting these forces to the foundation. Where
sliding is used to isolate the elements, the effects of friction
between sliding elements shall be included as a force.
1604.10 Wind and seismic detailing. Lateral-force-resisting
systems shall meet seismic detailing requirements and limita-
tions prescribed in this code and ASCE 7, excluding Chapter
14 and Appendix 11A, even when wind load effects are greater
than seismic load effects.

TABLE 1604.5
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

OCCUPANCY
CATEGORY

NATURE OF OCCUPANCY

I

II

III

IV

Buildings and other structures that represent a low hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:
(cid:129) Agricultural facilities.
(cid:129) Certain temporary facilities.
(cid:129) Minor storage facilities.

Buildings and other structures except those listed in Occupancy Categories I, III and IV

Buildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not
limited to:
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures whose primary occupancy is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures containing elementary school, secondary school or day care facilities with an occupant
load greater than 250.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures containing adult education facilities, such as colleges and universities with an occupant
load greater than 500.
(cid:129) Group I-2 occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or more resident patients but not having surgery or emergency
treatment facilities.
(cid:129) Group I-3 occupancies.
(cid:129) Any other occupancy with an occupant load greater than 5,000a.
(cid:129) Power-generating stations, water treatment facilities for potable water, waste water treatment facilities and other pub-
lic utility facilities not included in Occupancy Category IV.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures not included in Occupancy Category IV containing sufficient quantities of toxic or ex-
plosive substances to be dangerous to the public if released.

Buildings and other structures designated as essential facilities, including but not limited to:
(cid:129) Group I-2 occupancies having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.
(cid:129) Fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations and emergency vehicle garages.
(cid:129) Designated earthquake, hurricane or other emergency shelters.
(cid:129) Designated emergency preparedness, communications and operations centers and other facilities required for emer-
gency response.
(cid:129) Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as emergency backup facilities for Occupancy
Category IV structures.
(cid:129) Structures containing highly toxic materials as defined by Section 307 where the quantity of the material exceeds the
maximum allowable quantities of Table 307.1(2).
(cid:129) Aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency aircraft hangars.
(cid:129) Buildings and other structures having critical national defense functions.
(cid:129) Water storage facilities and pump structures required to maintain water pressure for fire suppression.

a. For purposes of occupant load calculation, occupancies required by Table 1004.1.1 to use gross floor area calculations shall be permitted to use net floor areas to
determine the total occupant load.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

307

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:32 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

SECTION 1605
LOAD COMBINATIONS

1605.1 General. Buildings and other structures and portions
thereof shall be designed to resist:
1. The load combinations specified in Section 1605.2,
1605.3.1 or 1605.3.2,
2. The load combinations specified in Chapters 18 through
23, and
3. The load combinations with overstrength factor speci-
fied in Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7 where required by
Section 12.2.5.2, 12.3.3.3 or 12.10.2.1 of ASCE 7. With
the simplified procedure of ASCE 7 Section 12.14, the
load combinations with overstrength factor of Section
12.14.3.2 or ASCE 7 shall be used.
Applicable loads shall be considered, including both earth-
quake and wind, in accordance with the specified load combi-
nations. Each load combination shall also be investigated with
one or more of the variable loads set to zero.
Where the load combinations with overstrength factor in
Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7 apply, they shall be used as fol-
lows:
1. The bas ic comb ina t ions fo r s t reng th des ign w i th
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-5 and 16-7 in
Section 1605.2.1.
2. The basic combinations for allowable stress design with
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-12, 16-13 and
16-15 in Section 1605.3.1.
3. The basic combinations for allowable stress design with
overstrength factor in lieu of Equations 16-20 and 16-21
in Section 1605.3.2.
1605.1.1 Stability. Regardless of which load combinations
are used to design for strength, where overall structure sta-
bility (such as stability against overturning, sliding, or buoy-
ancy) is being verified, use of the load combinations
specified in Section 1605.2 or 1605.3 shall be permitted.
Where the load combinations specified in Section 1605.2
are used, strength reduction factors applicable to soil resis-
tance shall be provided by a registered design professional.
The stability of retaining walls shall be verified in accor-
dance with Section 1807.2.3.
1605.2 Load combinations using strength design or load
and resistance factor design.
1605.2.1 Basic load combinations. Where strength design

or load and resistance factor design is used, structures and
portions thereof shall resist the most critical effects from the
following combinations of factored loads:

1.4(D + F)

1.2(D + F + T) + 1.6(L + H) +
0.5(Lr or S or R)

(Equation 16-1)

(Equation 16-2)

1.2D + 1.6(Lr or S or R) + (f1L or 0.8W)

(Equation 16-3)

1.2D + 1.6W + f1L + 0.5(Lr or S or R)

1.2D + 1.0E + f1L + f2S

(Equation 16-4)

(Equation 16-5)

308

0.9D + 1.6W + 1.6H

0.9D + 1.0E + 1.6H

(Equation 16-6)

(Equation 16-7)

where:
f1 = 1 for floors in places of public assembly, for live loads
in excess of 100 pounds per square foot (4.79 kN/m2),
and for parking garage live load, and
= 0.5 for other live loads.
f2 = 0.7 for roof configurations (such as saw tooth) that do
not shed snow off the structure, and
= 0.2 for other roof configurations.
Exception: Where other factored load combinations are
specifically required by the provisions of this code, such
combinations shall take precedence.
1605.2.2 Flood loads. Where flood loads, Fa, are to be con-
sidered in the design, the load combinations of Section 2.3.3
of ASCE 7 shall be used.
1605.3 Load combinations using allowable stress design.
1605.3.1 Basic load combinations. Where allowable stress
design (working stress design), as permitted by this code, is
used, structures and portions thereof shall resist the most
critical effects resulting from the following combinations of
loads:

D + F

D + H + F + L + T

D + H + F + (Lr or S or R)
D + H + F + 0.75(L + T) +
0.75(Lr or S or R)
D + H + F + (W or 0.7E)

D + H + F + 0.75(W or 0.7E) +
0.75L + 0.75(Lr or S or R)
0.6D + W + H

0.6D + 0.7E + H

(Equation 16-8)

(Equation 16-9)

(Equation 16-10)

(Equation 16-11)

(Equation 16-12)

(Equation 16-13)

(Equation 16-14)

(Equation 16-15)

Exceptions:
1. Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof
live load or with more than three-fourths of the
snow load or one-half of the wind load.
2. Flat roof snow loads of 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2) or less
and roof live loads of 30 psf or less need not be
combined with seismic loads. Where flat roof
snow loads exceed 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2), 20 percent
shall be combined with seismic loads.
1605.3.1.1 Stress increases. Increases in allowable
stresses specified in the appropriate material chapter or
the referenced standards shall not be used with the load
combinations of Section 1605.3.1, except that increases
shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 23.
1605.3.1.2 Flood loads. Where flood loads, Fa, are to be
considered in design, the load combinations of Section
2.4.2 of ASCE 7 shall be used.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:32 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1605.3.2 Alternative basic load combinations. In lieu of the
basic load combinations specified in Section 1605.3.1, struc-
tures and portions thereof shall be permitted to be designed for
the most critical effects resulting from the following combina-
tions. When using these alternative basic load combinations
that include wind or seismic loads, allowable stresses are per-
mitted to be increased or load combinations reduced where
permitted by the material chapter of this code or the referenced
standards. For load combinations that include the counteract-
ing effects of dead and wind loads, only two-thirds of the mini-
mum dead load likely to be in place during a design wind event
shall be used. Where wind loads are calculated in accordance
with Chapter 6 of ASCE 7, the coefficient w in the following
equations shall be taken as 1.3. For other wind loads, w shall be
taken as 1. When using these alternative load combinations to
evaluate sliding, overturning and soil bearing at the soil-struc-
ture interface, the reduction of foundation overturning from
Section 12.13.4 in ASCE 7 shall not be used. When using these
alternative basic load combinations for proportioning founda-
tions for loadings, which include seismic loads, the vertical
seismic load effect, Ev, in Equation 12.4-4 of ASCE 7 is permit-
ted to be taken equal to zero.

D + L + (Lr or S or R)
D + L + (wW)

D + L + wW + S/2

D + L + S + wW/2

D + L + S + E/1.4

0.9D + E/1.4

(Equation 16-16)

(Equation 16-17)

(Equation 16-18)

(Equation 16-19)

(Equation 16-20)

(Equation 16-21)

➡

Exceptions:
1. Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof live
loads or with more than three-fourths of the snow load
or one-half of the wind load.
2. Flat roof snow loads of 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2) or less and
roof live loads of 30 psf or less need not be combined
with seismic loads. Where flat roof snow loads
exceed 30 psf (1.44 kN/m2), 20 percent shall be com-
bined with seismic loads.
1605.3.2.1 Other loads. Where F, H or T are to be con-
sidered in the design, each applicable load shall be added
to the combinations specified in Section 1605.3.2.
1605.4 Heliports and helistops. Heliport and helistop landing
areas shall be designed for the following loads, combined in
accordance with Section 1605:
1. Dead load, D, plus the gross weight of the helicopter, Dh,
plus snow load, S.
2. Dead load, D, plus two single concentrated impact loads,
L, approximately 8 feet (2438 mm) apart applied any-
where on the touchdown pad (representing each of the
helicopter’s two main landing gear, whether skid type or
wheeled type), having a magnitude of 0.75 times the
gross weight of the helicopter. Both loads acting together
total 1.5 times the gross weight of the helicopter.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. Dead load, D, plus a uniform live load, L, of 100 psf (4.79
kN/m2).
Exception: Landing areas designed for helicopters with
gross weights not exceeding 3,000 pounds (13.34 kN) in
accordance with Items 1 and 2 shall be permitted to be
designed using a 40 psf (1.92 kN/m2) uniform live load in
Item 3, provided the landing area is identified with a 3,000-
pound (13.34 kN) weight limitation. This 40 psf (1.92
kN/m2) uniform live load shall not be reduced. The landing
area weight limitation shall be indicated by the numeral “3”
(kips) located in the bottom right corner of the landing area
as viewed from the primary approach path. The indication
for the landing area weight limitation shall be a minimum 5
feet (1524 mm) in height.

SECTION 1606
DEAD LOADS

1606.1 General. Dead loads are those loads defined in Section
1602.1. Dead loads shall be considered permanent loads.

1606.2 Design dead load. For purposes of design, the actual
weights of materials of construction and fixed service equip-
ment shall be used. In the absence of definite information, val-
ues used shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

SECTION 1607
LIVE LOADS

1607.1 General. Live loads are those loads defined in Section
1602.1.

1607.2 Loads not specified. For occupancies or uses not des-
ignated in Table 1607.1, the live load shall be determined in
accordance with a method approved by the building official.

1607.3 Uniform live loads. The live loads used in the design of
buildings and other structures shall be the maximum loads
expected by the intended use or occupancy but shall in no case
be less than the minimum uniformly distributed unit loads
required by Table 1607.1.

1607.4 Concentrated loads. Floors and other similar surfaces
shall be designed to support the uniformly distributed live
loads prescribed in Section 1607.3 or the concentrated load, in
pounds (kilonewtons), given in Table 1607.1, whichever pro-
duces the greater load effects. Unless otherwise specified, the
indicated concentration shall be assumed to be uniformly dis-
tributed over an area 21/2 feet by 21/2 feet [61/4 square feet (0.58
m2)] and shall be located so as to produce the maximum load
effects in the structural members.

1607.5 Partition loads. In office buildings and in other build-
ings where partition locations are subject to change, provisions
for partition weight shall be made, whether or not partitions are
shown on the construction documents, unless the specified live
load exceeds 80 psf (3.83 kN/m2). The partition load shall not
be less than a uniformly distributed live load of 15 psf (0.74
kN/m2).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

309

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:33 AM

7

TABLE 1607.1
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo,AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

1. Apartments (see residential)

—

—

2. Access floor systems
Office use
Computer use

50
100

2,000
2,000

3. Armories and drill rooms

150

—

4. Assembly areas and theaters
Fixed seats (fastened to floor)
Follow spot, projections and control
rooms
Lobbies
Movable seats
Stages and platforms
Other assembly areas

60

50
100
100
125
100

—

5. Balconies (exterior) and decksh

Same as
occupancy
served

—

6. Bowling alleys

75

—

7. Catwalks

40

300

8. Cornices

60

—

9. Corridors, except as otherwise indicated

100

—

10. Dance halls and ballrooms

100

—

11. Dining rooms and restaurants

100

—

12. Dwellings (see residential)

—

—

13. Elevator machine room grating
(on area of 4 in2)

—

300

14. Finish light floor plate construction
(on area of 1 in2)

—

200

15. Fire escapes
On single-family dwellings only

100
40

—

16. Garages (passenger vehicles only)
Trucks and buses

40
Note a
See Section 1607.6

17. Grandstands
(see stadium and arena bleachers)

—

—

18. Gymnasiums, main floors and balconies

100

—

19. Handrails, guards and grab bars

See Section 1607.7

20. Hospitals
Corridors above first floor
Operating rooms, laboratories
Patient rooms

80
60
40

1,000
1,000
1,000

21. Hotels (see residential)

—

—

22. Libraries
Corridors above first floor
Reading rooms
Stack rooms

80
60
150b

1,000
1,000
1,000

continued

TABLE 1607.1—continued
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo, AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

23. Manufacturing
Heavy
Light

250
125

3,000
2,000

24. Marquees

75

—

25. Office buildings
Corridors above first floor
File and computer rooms shall be
designed for heavier loads based
on anticipated occupancy
Lobbies and first-floor corridors
Offices

80

—

100
50

2,000

—

2,000
2,000

26. Penal institutions
Cell blocks
Corridors

40
100

—

27. Residential
One- and two-family dwellings
Uninhabitable attics without storagei
Uninhabitable attics with limited
storagei, j, k
Habitable attics and sleeping areas
All other areas
Hotels and multifamily dwellings
Private rooms and corridors
serving them
Public rooms and corridors serving
them

10
20

30
40

40

100

—

28. Reviewing stands, grandstands and
bleachers

Note c

29. Roofs
All roof surfaces subject to maintenance
workers
Awnings and canopies
Fabric construction supported by a
lightweight rigid skeleton structure
All other construction
Ordinary flat, pitched, and curved roofs
Primary roof members, exposed to a
work floor
Single panel point of lower chord of
roof trusses or any point along
primary structural members
supporting roofs:
Over manufacturing, storage
wa rehouses ,
and
repa i r
garages
All other occupancies
Roofs used for other special purposes
Roofs used for promenade purposes
Roofs used for roof gardens or
assembly purposes

5
nonreducible
20
20

Note 1
60
100

300

2,000
300
Note 1

30. Schools
Classrooms
Corridors above first floor
First-floor corridors

40
80
100

1,000
1,000
1,000

31. Scuttles, skylight ribs and accessible
ceilings

—

200

32. Sidewalks, vehicular driveways and
yards, subject to trucking

250d

8,000e

33. Skating rinks

100

—

continued

310

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

8

16_ibc_2009pg310.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:07:50 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 1607.1—continued
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, Lo,AND
MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADSg

OCCUPANCY OR USE

34. Stadiums and arenas
Bleachers
Fixed seats (fastened to floor)

35. Stairs and exits
One- and two-family dwellings
All other

36. Storage warehouses
(shall be designed for heavier loads if
required for anticipated storage)
Heavy
Light

37. Stores
Retail
First floor
Upper floors
Wholesale, all floors

38. Vehicle barrier systems

39. Walkways and elevated platforms
(other than exitways)

40. Yards and terraces, pedestrians

UNIFORM
(psf)

CONCENTRATED
(lbs.)

100c
60c

40
100

250
125

100
75
125

—

Note f

1,000
1,000
1,000

See Section 1607.7.3

60

100

—

—

For SI:

1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2,
1 square foot = 0.0929 m2,
1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 pound = 0.004448 kN,
1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m3
a. Floors in garages or portions of buildings used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be
designed for the uniformly distributed live loads of Table 1607.1 or the following con-
centrated loads: (1) for garages restricted to passenger vehicles accommodating not
more than nine passengers, 3,000 pounds acting on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches;
(2) for mechanical parking structures without slab or deck which are used for storing
passenger vehicles only, 2,250 pounds per wheel.
b. The loading applies to stack room floors that support nonmobile, double-faced library
bookstacks, subject to the following limitations:
1. The nominal bookstack unit height shall not exceed 90 inches;
2. The nominal shelf depth shall not exceed 12 inches for each face; and
3. Parallel rows of double-faced bookstacks shall be separated by aisles not less
than 36 inches wide.
c. Design in accordance with the ICC 300.
d. Other uniform loads in accordance with an approved method which contains provisions
for truck loadings shall also be considered where appropriate.
e. The concentrated wheel load shall be applied on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches.
f. Minimum concentrated load on stair treads (on area of 4 square inches) is 300 pounds.
g. Where snow loads occur that are in excess of the design conditions, the structure shall
be designed to support the loads due to the increased loads caused by drift buildup or a
greater snow design determined by the building official (see Section 1608). For spe-
cial-purpose roofs, see Section 1607.11.2.2.
h. See Section 1604.8.3 for decks attached to exterior walls.
i. Attics without storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joist and
rafter is less than 42 inches, or where there are not two or more adjacent trusses with the
same web configuration capable of containing a rectangle 42 inches high by 2 feet
wide, or greater, located within the plane of the truss. For attics without storage, this live
load need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirements.
j. For attics with limited storage and constructed with trusses, this live load need only be
applied to those portions of the bottom chord where there are two or more adjacent
trusses with the same web configuration capable of containing a rectangle 42 inches
high by 2 feet wide or greater, located within the plane of the truss. The rectangle shall
fit between the top of the bottom chord and the bottom of any other truss member, pro-
vided that each of the following criteria is met:
i. The attic area is accessible by a pull-down stairway or framed opening in accor-
dance with Section 1209.2, and
ii. The truss shall have a bottom chord pitch less than 2:12.
iii. Bottom chords of trusses shall be designed for the greater of actual imposed dead
load or 10 psf, uniformly distributed over the entire span.
k. Attic spaces served by a fixed stair shall be designed to support the minimum live load
specified for habitable attics and sleeping rooms.
l. Roofs used for other special purposes shall be designed for appropriate loads as
approved by the building official.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

1607.6 Truck and bus garages. Minimum live loads for
garages having trucks or buses shall be as specified in Table
1607.6, but shall not be less than 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), unless
other loads are specifically justified and approved by the build-
ing official. Actual loads shall be used where they are greater
than the loads specified in the table.
1607.6.1 Truck and bus garage live load application. The
concentrated load and uniform load shall be uniformly dis-
tributed over a 10-foot (3048 mm) width on a line normal to
the centerline of the lane placed within a 12-foot-wide
(3658 mm) lane. The loads shall be placed within their indi-
vidual lanes so as to produce the maximum stress in each
structural member. Single spans shall be designed for the
uniform load in Table 1607.6 and one simultaneous concen-
trated load positioned to produce the maximum effect. Mul-
tiple spans shall be designed for the uniform load in Table
1607.6 on the spans and two simultaneous concentrated
loads in two spans positioned to produce the maximum neg-
ative moment effect. Multiple span design loads, for other
effects, shall be the same as for single spans.

TABLE 1607.6
UNIFORM AND CONCENTRATED LOADS

LOADING
CLASSa

UNIFORM LOAD
(pounds/linear
foot of lane)

H20-44 and HS20-44

H15-44 and HS15-44

640

480

CONCENTRATED LOAD
(pounds)b

For moment
design

For shear
design

18,000

13,500

26,000

19,500

For SI: 1 pound per linear foot = 0.01459 kN/m, 1 pound = 0.004448 kN,
1 ton = 8.90 kN.
a. An H loading class designates a two-axle truck with a semitrailer. An HS
loading class designates a tractor truck with a semitrailer. The numbers fol-
lowing the letter classification indicate the gross weight in tons of the stan-
dard truck and the year the loadings were instituted.
b. See Section 1607.6.1 for the loading of multiple spans.

1607.7 Loads on handrails, guards, grab bars, seats and
vehicle barrier systems. Handrails, guards, grab bars, acces-
sible seats, accessible benches and vehicle barrier systems
shall be designed and constructed to the structural loading con-
ditions set forth in this section.
1607.7.1 Handrails and guards. Handrails and guards
shall be designed to resist a load of 50 pounds per linear foot
(plf) (0.73 kN/m) applied in any direction at the top and to
transfer this load through the supports to the structure. Glass
handrail assemblies and guards shall also comply with Sec-
tion 2407.
Exceptions:
1. For one- and two-family dwellings, only the single
concentrated load required by Section 1607.7.1.1
shall be applied.
2. In Group I-3, F, H and S occupancies, for areas that
are not accessible to the general public and that
have an occupant load less than 50, the minimum
load shall be 20 pounds per foot (0.29 kN/m).
1607.7.1.1 Concentrated load. Handrails and guards
shall be able to resist a single concentrated load of 200
pounds (0.89 kN), applied in any direction at any point

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

311

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:34 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

➡

along the top, and to transfer this load through the sup-
ports to the structure. This load need not be assumed to
act concurrently with the loads specified in Section
1607.7.1.
1607.7.1.2 Components. Intermediate rails (all those
except the handrail), balusters and panel fillers shall be
designed to withstand a horizontally applied normal load
of 50 pounds (0.22 kN) on an area equal to 1 square foot
(0.093 m2), including openings and space between rails.
Reactions due to this loading are not required to be
supe r impo sed w i th tho se o f Sec t ion 1607 .7 .1 o r
1607.7.1.1.
1607.7.2 Grab bars, shower seats and dressing room
bench seats. Grab bars, shower seats and dressing room
bench seat systems shall be designed to resist a single con-
centrated load of 250 pounds (1.11 kN) applied in any direc-
tion at any point.
1607.7.3 Vehicle barrier systems. Vehicle barrier systems
for passenger vehicles shall be designed to resist a single
load of 6,000 pounds (26.70 kN) applied horizontally in any
direction to the barrier system and shall have anchorage or
attachment capable of transmitting this load to the structure.
For design of the system, two loading conditions shall be
analyzed. The first condition shall apply the load at a height
of 1 foot, 6 inches (457 mm) above the floor or ramp surface.
The second loading condition shall apply the load at 2 feet, 3
inches (686 mm) above the floor or ramp surface. The more
severe load condition shall govern the design of the barrier
restraint system. The load shall be assumed to act on an area
not to exceed 1 square foot (0.0929 m2), and is not required
to be assumed to act concurrently with any handrail or guard
loadings specified in Section 1607.7.1. Garages accommo-
dating trucks and buses shall be designed in accordance
with an approved method that contains provisions for traffic
railings.
1607.8 Impact loads. The live loads specified in Section
1607.3 include allowance for impact conditions. Provisions
shall be made in the structural design for uses and loads that
involve unusual vibration and impact forces.
1607.8.1 Elevators. Elevator loads shall be increased by
100 percent for impact and the structural supports shall be
designed within the limits of deflection prescribed by
ASME A17.1.
1607.8.2 Machinery. For the purpose of design, the weight
of machinery and moving loads shall be increased as fol-
lows to allow for impact: (1) elevator machinery, 100 per-
cent; (2) light machinery, shaft- or motor-driven, 20 percent;
(3) reciprocating machinery or power-driven units, 50 per-
cent; (4) hangers for floors or balconies, 33 percent. Per-
centages shall be increased where specified by the
manufacturer.
1607.9 Reduction in live loads. Except for uniform live loads
at roofs, all other minimum uniformly distributed live loads, Lo,
in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with
Section 1607.9.1 or 1607.9.2. Roof uniform live loads, other
than special purpose roofs of Section 1607.11.2.2, are permit-

ted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.11.2. Roof
uniform live loads of special purpose roofs are permitted to be
reduced in accordance with Section 1607.9.1 or 1607.9.2.
1607.9.1 General. Subject to the limitations of Sections
1607.9.1.1 through 1607.9.1.4, members for which a value
of KLLAT is 400 square feet (37.16 m2) or more are permitted
to be designed for a reduced live load in accordance with the
following equation:

L

=

L

o

0 25
.

+

æ
ç
ç
è

For SI: L

=

L

o

15
K A

LL

T

ö
÷
÷
ø

(Equation 16-22)

0 25
.

+

æ
ç
ç
è

4 57
.
K A

LL

T

ö
÷
÷
ø

where:
L = Reduced design live load per square foot (meter) of
area supported by the member.
Lo = Unreduced design live load per square foot (meter) of
area supported by the member (see Table 1607.1).
KLL = Live load element factor (see Table 1607.9.1).
AT = Tributary area, in square feet (square meters).
L shall not be less than 0.50Lo for members supporting one
floor and L shall not be less than 0.40Lo for members sup-
porting two or more floors.

TABLE 1607.9.1
LIVE LOAD ELEMENT FACTOR, KLL

ELEMENT

KLL

Interior columns
Exterior columns without cantilever slabs

Edge columns with cantilever slabs

Corner columns with cantilever slabs
Edge beams without cantilever slabs
Interior beams

All other members not identified above including:
Edge beams with cantilever slabs
Cantilever beams
One-way slabs
Two-way slabs
Members without provisions for continuous shear
transfer normal to their span

4
4

3

2
2
2

1

1607.9.1.1 One-way slabs. The tributary area, AT, for
use in Equation 16-22 for one-way slabs shall not exceed
an area defined by the slab span times a width normal to
the span of 1.5 times the slab span.
1607.9.1.2 Heavy live loads. Live loads that exceed 100
psf (4.79 kN/m2) shall not be reduced.
Exceptions:
1. The live loads for members supporting two or
more floors are permitted to be reduced by a
maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall

312

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:34 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

not be less than L as calculated in Section
1607.9.1.
2. For uses other than storage, where approved,
additional live load reductions shall be permit-
ted where shown by the registered design pro-
fessional that a rational approach has been used
and that such reductions are warranted.
1607.9.1.3 Passenger vehicle garages. The live loads
shall not be reduced in passenger vehicle garages.
Exception: The live loads for members supporting
two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a
maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall not be
less than L as calculated in Section 1607.9.1.
1607.9.1.4 Group A occupancies. Live loads of 100 psf
(4.79 kN/m2) and at areas where fixed seats are located
shall not be reduced in Group A occupancies.
1607.9.1.5 Roof members. Live loads of 100 psf (4.79
kN/m2) or less shall not be reduced for roof members
except as specified in Section 1607.11.2.
1607.9.2 Alternate floor live load reduction. As an alter-
native to Section 1607.9.1, floor live loads are permitted to
be reduced in accordance with the following provisions.
Such reductions shall apply to slab systems, beams, girders,
columns, piers, walls and foundations.
1. A reduction shall not be permitted in Group A occu-
pancies.
2. A reduction shall not be permitted where the live load
exceeds 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2) except that the design
live load for members supporting two or more floors
is permitted to be reduced by 20 percent.
Exception: For uses other than storage, where
approved, additional live load reductions shall be
permitted where shown by the registered design
professional that a rational approach has been used
and that such reductions are warranted.
3. A reduction shall not be permitted in passenger vehi-
cle parking garages except that the live loads for
members supporting two or more floors are permitted
to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.
4. For live loads not exceeding 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2), the
design live load for any structural member supporting
150 square feet (13.94 m2) or more is permitted to be
reduced in accordance with Equation 16-23.
5. For one-way slabs, the area, A, for use in Equation
16-23 shall not exceed the product of the slab span
and a width normal to the span of 0.5 times the slab
span.

R = 0.08(A - 150)

(Equation 16-23)

For SI: R = 0.861(A - 13.94)
Such reduction shall not exceed the smallest of:
1. 40 percent for horizontal members;
2. 60 percent for vertical members; or

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. R as determined by the following equation.

R

(Equation 16-24)

R = 23.1(1 + D/Lo)
where:
A
= Area of floor supported by the member,
square feet (m2).
D = Dead load per square foot (m2) of area sup-
ported.
Lo = Unreduced live load per square foot (m2) of
area supported.
= Reduction in percent.
1607.10 Distribution of floor loads. Where uniform floor live
loads are involved in the design of structural members arranged
so as to create continuity, the minimum applied loads shall be
the full dead loads on all spans in combination with the floor
live loads on spans selected to produce the greatest effect at
each location under consideration. It shall be permitted to
reduce floor live loads in accordance with Section 1607.9.
1607.11 Roof loads. The structural supports of roofs and mar-
quees shall be designed to resist wind and, where applicable,
snow and earthquake loads, in addition to the dead load of con-
struction and the appropriate live loads as prescribed in this
section, or as set forth in Table 1607.1. The live loads acting on
a sloping surface shall be assumed to act vertically on the hori-
zontal projection of that surface.
1607.11.1 Distribution of roof loads. Where uniform roof
live loads are reduced to less than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m2) in
accordance with Section 1607.11.2.1 and are applied to the
design of structural members arranged so as to create conti-
nuity, the reduced roof live load shall be applied to adjacent
spans or to alternate spans, whichever produces the most
unfavorable load effect. See Section 1607.11.2 for reduc-
tions in minimum roof live loads and Section 7.5 of ASCE 7
for partial snow loading.
1607.11.2 Reduction in roof live loads. The minimum uni-
formly distributed live loads of roofs and marquees, Lo, in
Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with
Section 1607.11.2.1 or 1607.11.2.2.
1607.11.2.1 Flat, pitched and curved roofs. Ordinary
flat, pitched and curved roofs, and awnings and canopies
other than of fabric construction supported by light-
weight rigid skeleton structures, are permitted to be
designed for a reduced roof live load as specified in the
following equations or other controlling combinations of
loads in Section 1605, whichever produces the greater
load. In structures such as greenhouses, where special
scaffolding is used as a work surface for workers and
materials during maintenance and repair operations, a
lower roof load than specified in the following equations
shall not be used unless approved by the building official.
Such structures shall be designed for a minimum roof
live load of 12 psf (0.58 kN/m2).

Lr = Lo R1R2

where: 12 £ Lr £ 20

(Equation 16-25)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

313

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

For SI: Lr = LoR1R2
where: 0.58 £ Lr £ 0.96
Lr = Reduced live load per square foot (m2) of horizon-
tal projection in pounds per square foot (kN/m2).
The reduction factors R1 and R2 shall be determined as
follows:

R1 = 1 for At £ 200 square feet
(18.58 m2)

(Equation 16-26)

R1 = 1.2 – 0.001At for 200 square
feet < At < 600 square feet
For SI: 1.2 – 0.011At for 18.58 square meters < At < 55.74
square meters

(Equation 16-27)

R1 = 0.6 for At ³ 600 square feet
(55.74 m2)

(Equation 16-28)

where:
At = Tributary area (span length multiplied by effective
width) in square feet (m2) supported by any struc-
tural member, and

R2 = 1 for F £ 4

R2 = 1.2 – 0.05 F for 4 < F < 12

(Equation 16-29)

(Equation 16-30)

(Equation 16-31)

R2 = 0.6 for F ³ 12
where:
F = For a sloped roof, the number of inches of rise per
foot (for SI: F = 0.12 ´ slope, with slope expressed
as a percentage), or for an arch or dome, the
rise-to-span ratio multiplied by 32.
1607.11.2.2 Special-purpose roofs. Roofs used for
promenade purposes, roof gardens, assembly purposes
or other special purposes, and marquees, shall be
designed for a minimum live load, Lo, as specified in
Table 1607.1. Such live loads are permitted to be reduced
in accordance with Section 1607.9. Live loads of 100 psf
(4.79 kN/m2) or more at areas of roofs classified as
Group A occupancies shall not be reduced.
1607.11.3 Landscaped roofs. Where roofs are to be land-
scaped, the uniform design live load in the landscaped area
shall be 20 psf (0.958 kN/m2). The weight of the landscap-
ing materials shall be considered as dead load and shall be
computed on the basis of saturation of the soil.
1607.11.4 Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies
shall be designed for uniform live loads as required in Table
1607.1 as well as for snow loads and wind loads as specified
in Sections 1608 and 1609.
1607.12 Crane loads. The crane live load shall be the rated
capacity of the crane. Design loads for the runway beams,
including connections and support brackets, of moving bridge
cranes and monorail cranes shall include the maximum wheel

loads of the crane and the vertical impact, lateral and longitudi-
nal forces induced by the moving crane.
1607.12.1 Maximum wheel load. The maximum wheel
loads shall be the wheel loads produced by the weight of the
bridge, as applicable, plus the sum of the rated capacity and
the weight of the trolley with the trolley positioned on its
runway at the location where the resulting load effect is
maximum.
1607.12.2 Vertical impact force. The maximum wheel
loads of the crane shall be increased by the percentages
shown below to determine the induced vertical impact or
vibration force:
Monorail cranes (powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 25 percent
Cab-operated or remotely operated
bridge cranes (powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 25 percent
Pendant-operated bridge cranes
(powered) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  · 10 percent
Bridge cranes or monorail cranes with
hand-geared bridge, trolley and hoist ·  ·  ·  ·  · 0 percent
1607.12.3 Lateral force. The lateral force on crane runway
beams with electrically powered trolleys shall be calculated
as 20 percent of the sum of the rated capacity of the crane
and the weight of the hoist and trolley. The lateral force shall
be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a
runway beam, in either direction perpendicular to the beam,
and shall be distributed according to the lateral stiffness of
the runway beam and supporting structure.
1607.12.4 Longitudinal force. The longitudinal force on
crane runway beams, except
for bridge cranes with
hand-geared bridges, shall be calculated as 10 percent of the
maximum wheel loads of the crane. The longitudinal force
shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of
a runway beam, in either direction parallel to the beam.
1607.13 Interior walls and partitions. Interior walls and par-
titions that exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, including their
finish materials, shall have adequate strength to resist the loads
to which they are subjected but not less than a horizontal load of
5 psf (0.240 kN/m2).
Exception: Fabric partitions complying with Section
1607.13.1 shall not be required to resist the minimum hori-
zontal load of 5 psf (0.24 kN/m2).
1607.13.1 Fabric partitions. Fabric partitions that exceed 6
feet (1829 mm) in height, including their finish materials,
shall have adequate strength to resist the following load con-
ditions:
1. A horizontal distributed load of 5 psf (0.24 kN/m2)
applied to the partition framing. The total area used to
determine the distributed load shall be the area of the
fabric face between the framing members to which
the fabric is attached. The total distributed load shall
be uniformly applied to such framing members in
proportion to the length of each member.

314

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

2. A concentrated load of 40 pounds (0.176 kN) applied
to an 8-inch diameter (203 mm) area [50.3 square
inches (32 452 mm2)] of the fabric face at a height of
54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.

SECTION 1608
SNOW LOADS

1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall be determined in
accordance with Chapter 7 of ASCE 7, but the design roof load
shall not be less than that determined by Section 1607.
1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used
in determining the design snow loads for roofs shall be deter-
mined in accordance with ASCE 7 or Figure 1608.2 for the
contiguous United States and Table 1608.2 for Alaska.
Site-specific case studies shall be made in areas designated
“CS” in Figure 1608.2. Ground snow loads for sites at eleva-
tions above the limits indicated in Figure 1608.2 and for all
sites within the CS areas shall be approved. Ground snow load
determination for such sites shall be based on an extreme value
statistical analysis of data available in the vicinity of the site
using a value with a 2-percent annual probability of being
exceeded (50-year mean recurrence interval). Snow loads are
zero for Hawaii, except in mountainous regions as approved by
the building official.

SECTION 1609
WIND LOADS

1609.1 Applications. Buildings, structures and parts thereof
shall be designed to withstand the minimum wind loads pre-

scribed herein. Decreases in wind loads shall not be made for
the effect of shielding by other structures.

1609.1.1 Determination of wind loads. Wind loads on
every building or structure shall be determined in accor-
dance with Chapter 6 of ASCE 7 or provisions of the alter-
nate all-heights method in Section 1609.6. The type of
opening protection required, the basic wind speed and the
exposure category for a site is permitted to be determined in
accordance with Section 1609 or ASCE 7. Wind shall be
assumed to come from any horizontal direction and wind
pressures shall be assumed to act normal to the surface con-
sidered.

Exceptions:

1. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
the provisions of ICC 600 shall be permitted for
applicable Group R-2 and R-3 buildings.
2. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
residential structures using the provisions of the
AF&PA WFCM.
3. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1,
residential structures using the provisions of AISI
S230.
4. Designs using NAAMM FP 1001.
5. Designs using TIA-222 for antenna-supporting
structures and antennas.
6. Wind tunnel tests in accordance with Section 6.6
of ASCE 7, subject to the limitations in Section
1609.1.1.2.

TABLE 1608.2
GROUND SNOW LOADS, pg , FOR ALASKAN LOCATIONS

LOCATION

Adak

Anchorage

Angoon

Barrow

Barter Island

Bethel

Big Delta

Cold Bay

Cordova

Fairbanks

Fort Yukon

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

30

50

70

25

35

40

50

25

100

60

60

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.

LOCATION

Galena

Gulkana

Homer

Juneau

Kenai

Kodiak

Kotzebue

McGrath

Nenana

Nome

Palmer

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

60

70

40

60

70

30

60

70

80

70

50

LOCATION

Petersburg

St. Paul Islands

Seward

Shemya

Sitka

Talkeetna

Unalakleet

Valdez

Whittier

Wrangell

Yakutat

POUNDS PER
SQUARE FOOT

150

40

50

25

50

120

50

160

300

60

150

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

315

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:35 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

In CS areas, site-specific Case Studies are required to
establish ground snow loads. Extreme local variations in
ground snow loads in these areas preclude mapping at
this scale.

Numbers in parentheses represent the upper elevation
limits in feet for the ground snow load values presented
below. Site -specific case studies are required to estab-
lish ground snow loads at elevations not covered.

To convert lb/sq ft to kNm2, multiply by 0.0479.

To convert feet to meters, multiply by 0.3048.

FIGURE 1608.2
GROUND SNOW LOADS, pg, FOR THE UNITED STATES (psf)

316

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg316.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:42:35 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1608.2–continued
GROUND SNOW LOADS, pg, FOR THE UNITED STATES (psf)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

317

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:40 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

1609.1.1.1 Applicability. The provisions of ICC 600 are
applicable only to buildings located within Exposure B
or C as defined in Section 1609.4. The provisions of ICC
600, AF&PA WFCM and AISI S230 shall not apply to
buildings sited on the upper half of an isolated hill, ridge
or escarpment meeting the following conditions:

1. The hill, ridge or escarpment is 60 feet (18 288
mm) or higher if located in Exposure B or 30 feet
(9144 mm) or higher if located in Exposure C;
2. The maximum average slope of the hill exceeds 10
percent; and
3. The hill, ridge or escarpment is unobstructed
upwind by other such topographic features for a
distance from the high point of 50 times the height
of the hill or 1 mile (1.61 km), whichever is
greater.
1609.1.1.2 Wind tunnel test limitations. The lower
limit on pressures for main wind-force-resisting systems
and components and cladding shall be in accordance
with Sections 1609.1.1.2.1 and 1609.1.1.2.2.

1 6 0 9 . 1 . 1 . 2 . 1 L o w e r
l i m i t s
o n m a i n
w ind-force-res ist ing system . Base over turn ing
moments determined from wind tunnel testing shall
be limited to not less than 80 percent of the design
base overturning moments determined in accordance
with Section 6.5 of ASCE 7, unless specific testing is
performed that demonstrates it is the aerodynamic
coefficient of the building, rather than shielding from
other structures, that is responsible for the lower val-
ues. The 80-percent limit shall be permitted to be
adjusted by the ratio of the frame load at critical wind
directions as determined from wind tunnel testing
without specific adjacent buildings, but including
appropriate upwind roughness, to that determined in
Section 6.5 of ASCE 7.

1609.1.1.2.2 Lower limits on components and clad-
ding. The design pressures for components and clad-
ding on walls or roofs shall be selected as the greater
of the wind tunnel test results or 80 percent of the
pressure obtained for Zone 4 for walls and Zone 1 for
roofs as determined in Section 6.5 of ASCE 7, unless
specific testing is performed that demonstrates it is
the aerodynamic coefficient of the building, rather
than shielding from nearby structures, that is respon-
sible for the lower values. Alternatively, limited tests
at a few wind directions without specific adjacent
buildings, but in the presence of an appropriate
upwind roughness, shall be permitted to be used to
demonstrate that the lower pressures are due to the
shape of the building and not to shielding.

1609.1.2 Protection of openings. In wind-borne debris
regions, glazing in buildings shall be impact resistant or pro-
tected with an impact-resistant covering meeting the
requirements of an approved impact-resistant standard or

ASTM E 1996 and ASTM E 1886 referenced herein as fol-
lows:

1. Glazed openings located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of
grade shall meet the requirements of the large missile
test of ASTM E 1996.
2. Glazed openings located more than 30 feet (9144
mm) above grade shall meet the provisions of the
small missile test of ASTM E 1996.

Exceptions:

1. Wood structural panels with a minimum thickness
of 7/16 inch (11.1 mm) and maximum panel span of
8 feet (2438 mm) shall be permitted for opening
protection in one- and two-story buildings classi-
fied as Group R-3 or R-4 occupancy. Panels shall
be precut so that they shall be attached to the fram-
ing surrounding the opening containing the prod-
uct with the glazed opening. Panels shall be
predrilled as required for the anchorage method
and shall be secured with the attachment hardware
provided. Attachments shall be designed to resist
the components and cladding loads determined in
accordance with the provisions of ASCE 7, with
corrosion-resistant attachment hardware provided
and anchors permanently installed on the building.
Attachment in accordance with Table 1609.1.2
with corrosion-resistant attachment hardware pro-
vided and anchors permanently installed on the
building is permitted for buildings with a mean
roof height of 45 feet (13 716 mm) or less where
wind speeds do not exceed 140 mph (63 m/s).
2. Glazing in Occupancy Category I buildings as
defined in Section 1604.5, including greenhouses
that are occupied for growing plants on a produc-
tion or research basis, without public access shall
be permitted to be unprotected.
3. Glazing in Occupancy Category II, III or IV build-
ings located over 60 feet (18 288 mm) above the
ground and over 30 feet (9144 mm) above aggre-
gate surface roofs located within 1,500 feet (458
m) of the building shall be permitted to be unpro-
tected.

1609.1.2.1 Louvers. Louvers protecting intake and
exhaust ventilation ducts not assumed to be open that are
located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of grade shall meet
requirements of an approved impact-resisting standard
or the large missile test of ASTM E 1996.

1609.1.2.2 Garage doors. Garage door glazed opening
protection for wind-borne debris shall meet the require-
ments of an approved impact-resisting standard or
ANSI/DASMA 115.

1609.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of Section 1609, have the meanings shown herein.

318

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:40 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.1.2
WIND-BORNE DEBRIS PROTECTION FASTENING
SCHEDULE FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELSa, b, c, d

FASTENER SPACING (inches)

FASTENER
TYPE

Panel Span
£ 4 feet

4 feet < Panel
Span £ 6 feet

6 feet < Panel
Span £ 8 feet

No. 8 wood-screw-based
anchor with 2-inch
embedment length

No. 10 wood-screw-based
anchor with 2-inch
embedment length

1/4-inch diameter
lag-screw-based anchor
with 2-inch embedment
length

16

16

16

10

12

16

8

9

16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 4.448 N,
1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. This table is based on 140 mph wind speeds and a 45-foot mean roof height.
b. Fasteners shall be installed at opposing ends of the wood structural panel.
Fasteners shall be located a minimum of 1 inch from the edge of the panel.
c. Anchors shall penetrate through the exterior wall covering with an
embedment length of 2 inches minimum into the building frame. Fasteners
shall be located a minimum of 21/2 inches from the edge of concrete block or
concrete.
d. Where panels are attached to masonry or masonry/stucco, they shall be
attached using vibration-resistant anchors having a minimum ultimate with-
drawal capacity of 1,500 pounds.

HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS. Areas vulnerable to
hurricanes defined as:
1. The U. S. Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico coasts
where the basic wind speed is greater than 90 mph (40
m/s) and
2. Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, Virgin Islands and Ameri-
can Samoa.
WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION. Portions of hurri-
cane-prone regions that are within 1 mile (1.61 km) of the
coastal mean high water line where the basic wind speed is 110
mph (48 m/s) or greater; or portions of hurricane-prone
regions where the basic wind speed is 120 mph (53 m/s) or
greater; or Hawaii.

1609.3 Basic wind speed. The basic wind speed, in mph, for
the determination of the wind loads shall be determined by Fig-
ure 1609. Basic wind speed for the special wind regions indi-
cated, near mountainous terrain and near gorges shall be in
accordance with local jurisdiction requirements. Basic wind
speeds determined by the local jurisdiction shall be in accor-
dance with Section 6.5.4 of ASCE 7.
In nonhurricane-prone regions, when the basic wind speed is
estimated from regional climatic data, the basic wind speed
shall be not less than the wind speed associated with an annual
probability of 0.02 (50-year mean recurrence interval), and the
estimate shall be adjusted for equivalence to a 3-second gust
wind speed at 33 feet (10 m) above ground in Exposure Cate-
gory C. The data analysis shall be performed in accordance
with Section 6.5.4.2 of ASCE 7.
1609.3.1 Wind speed conversion. When required, the
3-second gust basic wind speeds of Figure 1609 shall be
converted to fastest-mile wind speeds, Vfm, using Table
1609.3.1 or Equation 16-32.
(
V
10 5
. )
1 05
.

(Equation 16-32)

V

3

S

-

fm

=

where:
V3S = 3-second gust basic wind speed from Figure 1609.
1609.4 Exposure category. For each wind direction consid-
ered, an exposure category that adequately reflects the charac-
teristics of ground surface irregularities shall be determined for
the site at which the building or structure is to be constructed.
Account shall be taken of variations in ground surface rough-
ness that arise from natural topography and vegetation as well
as from constructed features.
1609.4.1 Wind directions and sectors. For each selected
wind direction at which the wind loads are to be evaluated,
the exposure of the building or structure shall be determined
for the two upwind sectors extending 45 degrees (0.79 rad)
either side of the selected wind direction. The exposures in
these two sectors shall be determined in accordance with
Sections 1609.4.2 and 1609.4.3 and the exposure resulting
in the highest wind loads shall be used to represent winds
from that direction.

TABLE 1609.3.1
EQUIVALENT BASIC WIND SPEEDSa, b, c

V3S

Vfm

85

71

90

76

100

85

105

90

110

95

120

104

125

109

130

114

140

123

145

128

150

133

160

142

170

152

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.44 m/s.
a. Linear interpolation is permitted.
b. V3S is the 3-second gust wind speed (mph).
c. Vfm is the fastest mile wind speed (mph).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

319

16_ibc_2009pg319.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:38:21 AM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1609
BASIC WIND SPEED (3-SECOND GUST)

320

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:38:57 AM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

Notes:
1. Values are nominal design 3-second gust wind speeds in miles per hour (m/s)
at 33 ft (10 m) above ground for Exposure C category.
2. Linear Interpolation between wind contours is permitted.
3. Islands and coastal areas outside the last contour shall use the last wind
speed contour of the coastal area.
4. Mountainous terrain, gorges, ocean promontories, and special wind regions
shall be examined for unusual wind conditions.

FIGURE 1609—continued
BASIC WIND SPEED (3-SECOND GUST)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

321

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:12 AM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1609–continued
BASIC WIND SPEED (3-SECOND GUST)
WESTERN GULF OF MEXICO HURRICANE COASTLINE

322

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:26 AM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1609–continued
BASIC WIND SPEED (3-SECOND GUST)
EASTERN GULF OF MEXICO AND SOUTHEASTERN U.S. HURRICANE COASTLINE

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

323

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:40 AM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1609–continued
BASIC WIND SPEED (3-SECOND GUST)
MID AND NORTHERN ATLANTIC HURRICANE COASTLINE

324

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:56 AM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1609.4.2 Surface roughness categories. A ground surface
roughness within each 45-degree (0.79 rad) sector shall be
determined for a distance upwind of the site as defined in
Section 1609.4.3 from the categories defined below, for the
purpose of assigning an exposure category as defined in
Section 1609.4.3.

Surface Roughness B. Urban and suburban areas,
wooded areas or other terrain with numerous closely
spaced obstructions having the size of single-family
dwellings or larger.

Surface Roughness C. Open terrain with scattered
obstructions having heights generally less than 30 feet
(9144 mm). This category includes flat open country,
grasslands, and all water surfaces in hurricane-prone
regions.

Surface Roughness D. Flat, unobstructed areas and
water surfaces outside hurricane-prone regions. This
category includes smooth mud flats, salt flats and unbro-
ken ice.

1609.4.3 Exposure categories. An exposure category shall
be determined in accordance with the following:

Exposure B. Exposure B shall apply where the ground
surface roughness condition, as defined by Surface
Roughness B, prevails in the upwind direction for a dis-
tance of at least 2,600 feet (792 m) or 20 times the height
of the building, whichever is greater.

Exception: For buildings whose mean roof height is
less than or equal to 30 feet (9144 mm), the upwind dis-
tance is permitted to be reduced to 1,500 feet (457 m).

Exposure C. Exposure C shall apply for all cases where
Exposures B or D do not apply.

Exposure D. Exposure D shall apply where the ground
surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness D,
prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least
5,000 feet (1524 m) or 20 times the height of the build-
ing, whichever is greater. Exposure D shall extend inland
from the shoreline for a distance of 600 feet (183 m) or 20
times the height of the building, whichever is greater.

1609.5 Roof systems.

1609.5.1 Roof deck. The roof deck shall be designed to
withstand the wind pressures determined in accordance
with ASCE 7.

1609.5.2 Roof coverings. Roof coverings shall comply
with Section 1609.5.1.

Exception: Rigid tile roof coverings that are air perme-
able and installed over a roof deck complying with Sec-
tion 1609.5.1 are permitted to be designed in accordance
with Section 1609.5.3.

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

Asphalt shingles installed over a roof deck complying
with Section 1609.5.1 shall comply with the wind-resis-
tance requirements of Section 1507.2.7.1.

1609.5.3 Rigid tile. Wind loads on rigid tile roof coverings
shall be determined in accordance with the following equa-
tion:

Ma = qhCLbLLa[1.0 – GCp]

(Equation 16-33)

For SI: Ma =

h

L

[

q C bLL
1 0
.
1 000
,

a

-

GC

]

p

where:
b
= Exposed width, feet (mm) of the roof tile.
CL = Lift coefficient. The lift coefficient for concrete and
clay tile shall be 0.2 or shall be determined by test in
accordance with Section 1716.2.
GCp = Roof pressure coefficient for each applicable roof
zone determined from Chapter 6 of ASCE 7. Roof
coefficients shall not be adjusted for internal pres-
sure.
L
= Length, feet (mm) of the roof tile.
La = Moment arm, feet (mm) from the axis of rotation to
the point of uplift on the roof tile. The point of uplift
shall be taken at 0.76L from the head of the tile and
the middle of the exposed width. For roof tiles with
nails or screws (with or without a tail clip), the axis
of rotation shall be taken as the head of the tile for
direct deck application or as the top edge of the bat-
ten for battened applications. For roof tiles fastened
only by a nail or screw along the side of the tile, the
axis of rotation shall be determined by testing. For
roof tiles installed with battens and fastened only by
a clip near the tail of the tile, the moment arm shall
be determined about the top edge of the batten with
consideration given for the point of rotation of the
tiles based on straight bond or broken bond and the
tile profile.
Ma = Aerodynamic uplift moment, feet-pounds (N-mm)
acting to raise the tail of the tile.
qh = Wind velocity pressure, psf (kN/m2) determined
from Section 6.5.10 of ASCE 7.
Concrete and clay roof tiles complying with the following
limitations shall be designed to withstand the aerodynamic
uplift moment as determined by this section.

1. The roof tiles shall be either loose laid on battens,
mechanically fastened, mortar set or adhesive set.
2. The roof tiles shall be installed on solid sheathing
which has been designed as components and clad-
ding.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

325

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:56 AM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. An underlayment shall be installed in accordance
with Chapter 15.
4. The tile shall be single lapped interlocking with a
minimum head lap of not less than 2 inches (51 mm).
5. The length of the tile shall be between 1.0 and 1.75
feet (305 mm and 533 mm).
6. The exposed width of the tile shall be between 0.67
and 1.25 feet (204 mm and 381 mm).
7. The maximum thickness of the tail of the tile shall not
exceed 1.3 inches (33 mm).
8. Roof tiles using mortar set or adhesive set systems
shall have at least two-thirds of the tile’s area free of
mortar or adhesive contact.
1609.6 Alternate all-heights method. The alternate wind
design provisions in this section are simplifications of the
ASCE 7 Method 2—Analytical Procedure.
1609.6.1 Scope. As an alternative to ASCE 7 Section 6.5,
the following provisions are permitted to be used to deter-
mine the wind effects on regularly shaped buildings, or
other structures that are regularly shaped, which meet all of
the following conditions:
1. The building or other structure is less than or equal to
75 feet (22 860 mm) in height with a height-to-least-
width ratio of 4 or less, or the building or other struc-
ture has a fundamental frequency greater than or
equal to 1 hertz.
2. The building or other structure is not sensitive to
dynamic effects.
3. The building or other structure is not located on a site
for which channeling effects or buffeting in the wake
of upwind obstructions warrant special consideration.
4. The building shall meet the requirements of a simple
diaphragm building as defined in ASCE 7 Section
6.2, where wind loads are only transmitted to the main
wind-force-resisting system (MWFRS) at the dia-
phragms.
5. For open buildings, multispan gable roofs, stepped
roofs, sawtooth roofs, domed roofs, roofs with slopes
greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad), solid free-standing
walls and solid signs, and rooftop equipment, apply
ASCE 7 provisions.
1609.6.1.1 Modifications. The following modifications
shall be made to certain subsections in ASCE 7: in Sec-
tion 1609.6.2, symbols and notations that are specific to
this section are used in conjunction with the symbols and
notations in ASCE 7 Section 6.3.

G

qs

Kd

1609.6.2 Symbols and notations. Coefficients and vari-
ables used in the alternative all-heights method equations
are as follows:
Cnet = Net-pressure coefficient based on Kd [(G) (Cp) –
(GCpi)], in accordance with Table 1609.6.2(2).
= Gust effect factor for rigid structures in accordance
with ASCE 7 Section 6.5.8.1.
= Wind directionality factor in accordance with
ASCE 7 Table 6-4.
Pnet = Design wind pressure to be used in determination
of wind loads on buildings or other structures or
their components and cladding, in psf (kN/m2).
= Wind stagnation pressure in psf (kN/m2) in accor-
dance with Table 1609.6.2(1).
1609.6.3 Design equations. When using the alternative
all-heights method, the MWFRS, and components and clad-
ding of every structure shall be designed to resist the effects
of wind pressures on the building envelope in accordance
with Equation 16-34.

Pnet = qs Kz Cnet [IKzt]

(Equation 16-34)

Design wind forces for the MWFRS shall not be less than
10 psf (0.48 kN/m2) multiplied by the area of the structure
projected on a plane normal to the assumed wind direction
(see ASCE 7 Section 6.1.4 for criteria). Design net wind
pressure for components and cladding shall not be less than
10 psf (0.48 kN/m2) acting in either direction normal to the
surface.

1609.6.4 Design procedure. The MWFRS and the compo-
nents and cladding of every building or other structure shall
be designed for the pressures calculated using Equation
16-34.

1609.6.4.1 Main wind-force-resisting systems. The
MWFRS shall be investigated for the torsional effects
identified in ASCE 7 Figure 6-9.
1609.6.4.2 Determination of Kz and Kzt. Velocity pres-
sure exposure coefficient, Kz, shall be determined in
accordance with ASCE 7 Section 6.5.6.6 and the topo-
graphic factor, Kzt, shall be determined in accordance
with ASCE 7 Section 6.5.7.
1. For the windward side of a structure, Kzt and Kz
shall be based on height z.
2. For leeward and sidewalls, and for windward and
leeward roofs, Kzt and Kz shall be based on mean
roof height h.

TABLE 1609.6.2(1)
WIND VELOCITY PRESSURE (qs) AT STANDARD HEIGHT OF 33 FEETa

BASIC WIND SPEED (mph)

PRESSURE, qs (psf)

85

18.5

90

20.7

100

25.6

105

28.2

110

31.0

120

36.9

125

40.0

130

43.3

140

50.2

150

57.6

160

65.5

170

74.0

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mph = 0.44 m/s, 1 psf = 47.88 Pa.
a. For basic wind speeds not shown, use qs = 0.00256 V2.

326

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg326.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:39:40 AM

24

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

327

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.6.2(2)
NET PRESSURE COEFFICIENTS, Cnet

a, b

STRUCTURE OR
PART THEREOF

DESCRIPTION

CnetFACTOR

1. Main wind-
force-resisting
frames and systems

Walls:

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

+ Internal
pressure

- Internal
pressure

+ Internal
pressure

- Internal
pressure

Windward wall

0.43

0.73

0.11

1.05

Leeward wall

-0.51

-0.21

-0.83

0.11

Sidewall

-0.66

-0.35

-0.97

-0.04

Parapet wall

Windward

1.28

1.28

Leeward

-0.85

-0.85

Roofs:

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Wind perpendicular to ridge

+ Internal
pressure

- Internal
pressure

+ Internal
pressure

- Internal
pressure

Leeward roof or flat roof

-0.66

-0.35

-0.97

-0.04

Windward roof slopes:

Slope < 2:12 (10°)

Condition 1

-1.09

-0.79

-1.41

-0.47

Condition 2

-0.28

0.02

-0.60

0.34

Slope = 4:12 (18°)

Condition 1

-0.73

-0.42

-1.04

-0.11

Condition 2

-0.05

0.25

-0.37

0.57

Slope = 5:12 (23°)

Condition 1

-0.58

-0.28

-0.90

0.04

Condition 2

0.03

0.34

-0.29

0.65

Slope = 6:12 (27°)

Condition 1

-0.47

-0.16

-0.78

0.15

Condition 2

0.06

0.37

-0.25

0.68

Slope = 7:12 (30°)

Condition 1

-0.37

-0.06

-0.68

0.25

Condition 2

0.07

0.37

-0.25

0.69

Slope 9:12 (37°)

Condition 1

-0.27

0.04

-0.58

0.35

Condition 2

0.14

0.44

-0.18

0.76

Slope 12:12 (45°)

0.14

0.44

-0.18

0.76

Wind parallel to ridge and flat roofs

-1.09

-0.79

-1.41

-0.47

Nonbuilding Structures: Chimneys, Tanks and Similar Structures:

h/D

1

7

25

Square (Wind normal to face)

0.99

1.07

1.53

Square (Wind on diagonal)

0.77

0.84

1.15

Hexagonal or Octagonal

0.81

0.97

1.13

Round

0.65

0.81

0.97

Open signs and lattice frameworks

Ratio of solid to gross area

< 0.1

0.1 to 0.29

0.3 to 0.7

Flat

1.45

1.30

1.16

Round

0.87

0.94

1.08

(continued)

25

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:57 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.6.2(2)—continued
NET PRESSURE COEFFICIENTS, Cnet

a, b

STRUCTURE OR
PART THEREOF

DESCRIPTION

Cnet FACTOR

Roof elements and slopes

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

2. Components and
cladding not in
areas of disconti-
nuity—roofs and
overhangs

Gable of hipped configurations (Zone 1)

Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11C Zone 1

Positive

Negative

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

Overhang: Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11B Zone 1

Negative

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

500 square feet or more

6:12 (27°) < Slope < 12:12 (45°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11D Zone 1

Positive

Negative

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

0.58

0.41

-1.00

-0.92

0.92

0.83

-1.00

-0.83

-1.45

-1.36

-0.94

0.89

0.72

-1.32

-1.23

1.23

1.15

-1.32

-1.15

Monosloped configurations (Zone 1)

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Flat < Slope < 7:12 (30°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-14B Zone 1

Positive

Negative

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

10 square feet or less

100 square feet or more

0.49

0.41

-1.26

-1.09

0.81

0.72

-1.57

-1.40

Tall flat-topped roofs h > 60¢

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Flat < Slope < 2:12 (10°) (Zone 1) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-17 Zone 1

Negative

10 square feet or less

500 square feet or more

(continued)

-1.34

-0.92

-1.66

-1.23

328

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:58 AM

26

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

329

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.6.2(2)—continued
NET PRESSURE COEFFICIENTS, Cnet

a, b

STRUCTURE OR
PART THEREOF

DESCRIPTION

Cnet FACTOR

3. Components and clad-
ding in areas of dis-
continuities—roofs
and overhangs

Roof elements and slopes

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Gable or hipped configurations at ridges, eaves and rakes (Zone 2)

Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11C Zone 2

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.58

0.89

100 square feet or more

0.41

10.72

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.68

-2.00

100 square feet or more

-1.17

-1.49

Overhang for Slope Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11C Zone 2

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.87

100 square feet or more

-1.87

6:12 (27°) < Slope < 12:12 (45°) Figure 6-11D

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.92

1.23

100 square feet or more

0.83

1.15

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.17

-1.49

100 square feet or more

-1.00

-1.32

Overhang for 6:12 (27°) < Slope < 12:12 (45°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11D Zone 2

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.70

500 square feet or more

-1.53

Monosloped configurations at ridges, eaves and rakes  (Zone 2)

Flat < Slope < 7:12 (30°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-14B Zone 2

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.49

0.81

100 square feet or more

0.41

0.72

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.51

-1.83

100 square feet or more

-1.43

-1.74

Tall flat topped roofs h > 60¢

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Flat < Slope < 2:12 (10°) (Zone 2) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-17 Zone 2

Negative

10 square feet or less

-2.11

-2.42

500 square feet or more

-1.51

-1.83

Gable or hipped configurations at corners (Zone 3) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11C Zone 3

Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°)

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.58

0.89

100 square feet or more

0.41

0.72

Negative

10 square feet or less

-2.53

-2.85

100 square feet or more

-1.85

-2.17

(continued)

27

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:58 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

330

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.6.2(2)—continued
NET PRESSURE COEFFICIENTS, Cnet

a, b

STRUCTURE OR
PART THEREOF

DESCRIPTION

Cnet FACTOR

3. Components and cladding in
areas of discontinuity—roofs
and overhangs
(continued)

Overhang for Slope Flat < Slope < 6:12 (27°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11C Zone 3

Negative

10 square feet or less

-3.15

100 square feet or more

-2.13

6:12 (27°) < 12:12 (45°) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-11D Zone 3

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.92

1.23

100 square feet or more

0.83

1.15

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.17

-1.49

100 square feet or more

-1.00

-1.32

Overhang for 6:12 (27°) < Slope < 12:12 (45°)

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.70

100 square feet or more

-1.53

Monosloped Configurations at corners (Zone 3) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-14B Zone 3

Flat < Slope < 7:12 (30°)

Positive

10 square feet or less

0.49

0.81

100 square feet or more

0.41

0.72

Negative

10 square feet or less

-2.62

-2.93

100 square feet or more

-1.85

-2.17

Tall flat topped roofs h > 60¢

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Flat < Slope < 2:12 (10°) (Zone 3) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-17 Zone 3

Negative

10 square feet or less

-2.87

-3.19

500 square feet or more

-2.11

-2.42

4. Components and cladding not
in areas of discontinuity—walls
and parapets

Wall Elements: h = 60¢ (Zone 4) Figure 6-11A

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

Positive

10 square feetor less

1.00

1.32

500 square feet or more

0.75

1.06

Negative

10 square feet or less

-1.09

-1.40

500 square feet or more

-0.83

-1.15

Wall Elements: h > 60¢ (Zone 4) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-17 Zone 4

Positive

20 square feet or less

0.92

1.23

500 square feet or more

0.66

0.98

Negative

20 square feet or less

-0.92

-1.23

500 square feet or more

-0.75

-1.06

Parapet Walls

Positive

2.87

3.19

Negative

-1.68

-2.00

28

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:58 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1609.6.2(2)—continued
NET PRESSURE COEFFICIENTS, Cnet

a, b

STRUCTURE OR
PART THEREOF

DESCRIPTION

Cnet FACTOR

Wall elements: h £ 60¢ (Zone 5) Figure 6-11A

Enclosed

Partially enclosed

5. Components and cladding
in areas of discontinuity—
walls and parapets

Positive

Negative

10 square feet or less

500 square feet or more

10 square feet or less

500 square feet or more

Wall elements: h > 60¢ (Zone 5) See ASCE 7 Figure 6-17 Zone 4

20 square feet or less

500 square feet or more

20 square feet or less

500 square feet or more

Positive

Negative

Parapet walls

Positive

Negative

1.00

0.75

-1.34

-0.83

0.92

0.66

-1.68

-1.00

3.64

-2.45

1.32

1.06

-1.66

-1.15

1.23

0.98

-2.00

-1.32

3.95

-2.76

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.
a. Linear interpolation between values in the table is permitted.
b. Some Cnet values have been grouped together. Less conservative results may be obtained by applying ASCE 7 provisions.

1609.6.4.3 Determination of net pressure coefficients,
Cnet. For the design of the MWFRS and for components
and cladding, the sum of the internal and external net
pressure shall be based on the net pressure coefficient,

Cnet.

1. The pressure coefficient, Cnet, for walls and roofs
shall be determined from Table 1609.6.2(2).
2. Where Cnet has more than one value, the more
severe wind load condition shall be used for
design.

1609.6.4.4 Application of wind pressures. When using
the alternative all-heights method, wind pressures shall
be applied simultaneously on, and in a direction normal
to, all building envelope wall and roof surfaces.

1609.6.4.4.1 Components and cladding. Wind pres-
sure for each component or cladding element is
applied as follows using Cnet values based on the
effective wind area, A, contained within the zones in
areas of discontinuity of width and/or length “a,” “2a”
or “4a” at: corners of roofs and walls; edge strips for
ridges, rakes and eaves; or field areas on walls or roofs
as indicated in figures in tables in ASCE 7 as refer-
enced in Table 1609.6.2(2) in accordance with the fol-
lowing:

1. Calculated pressures at local discontinuities
acting over specific edge strips or corner
boundary areas.

2. Include “field” (Zone 1, 2 or 4, as applicable)
pressures applied to areas beyond the bound-
aries of the areas of discontinuity.
3. Where applicable, the calculated pressures at
discontinuities (Zones 2 or 3) shall be com-
bined with design pressures that apply specifi-
cally on rakes or eave overhangs.

SECTION 1610
SOIL LATERAL LOADS

1610.1 General. Foundation walls and retaining walls shall be
designed to resist lateral soil loads. Soil loads specified in Table
1610.1 shall be used as the minimum design lateral soil loads
unless determined otherwise by a geotechnical investigation in
accordance with Section 1803. Foundation walls and other
walls in which horizontal movement is restricted at the top shall
be designed for at-rest pressure. Retaining walls free to move
and rotate at the top shall be permitted to be designed for active
pressure. Design lateral pressure from surcharge loads shall be
added to the lateral earth pressure load. Design lateral pressure
shall be increased if soils at the site are expansive. Foundation
walls shall be designed to support the weight of the full hydro-
static pressure of undrained backfill unless a drainage system is
installed in accordance with Sections 1805.4.2 and 1805.4.3.
Exception: Foundation walls extending not more than 8
feet (2438 mm) below grade and laterally supported by the
top by flexible diaphragms shall be permitted to be designed
for active pressure.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

331

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:58 AM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

DESCRIPTION OF BACKFILL MATERIALc

Well-graded, clean gravels; gravel-sand mixes

Poorly graded clean gravels; gravel-sand mixes

Silty gravels, poorly graded gravel-sand mixes

Clayey gravels, poorly graded gravel-and-clay mixes

Well-graded, clean sands; gravelly sand mixes

Poorly graded clean sands; sand-gravel mixes

Silty sands, poorly graded sand-silt mixes

Sand-silt clay mix with plastic fines

Clayey sands, poorly graded sand-clay mixes

Inorganic silts and clayey silts

Mixture of inorganic silt and clay

Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticity

Organic silts and silt clays, low plasticity

Inorganic clayey silts, elastic silts

Inorganic clays of high plasticity

Organic clays and silty clays

TABLE 1610.1
LATERAL SOIL LOAD

UNIFIED SOIL
CLASSIFICATION

DESIGN LATERAL SOIL LOADa
(pound per square foot per foot of depth)

Active pressure

At-rest pressure

GW

GP

GM

GC

SW

SP

SM

SM-SC

SC

ML

ML-CL

CL

OL

MH

CH

OH

30

30

40

45

30

30

45

45

60

45

60

60

Note b

Note b

Note b

Note b

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

100

100

100

100

100

Note b

Note b

Note b

Note b

For SI: 1 pound per square foot per foot of depth = 0.157 kPa/m, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Design lateral soil loads are given for moist conditions for the specified soils at their optimum densities. Actual field conditions shall govern. Submerged or satu-
rated soil pressures shall include the weight of the buoyant soil plus the hydrostatic loads.
b. Unsuitable as backfill material.
c. The definition and classification of soil materials shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2487.

SECTION 1611
RAIN LOADS

1611.1 Design rain loads. Each portion of a roof shall be
designed to sustain the load of rainwater that will accumulate
on it if the primary drainage system for that portion is blocked
plus the uniform load caused by water that rises above the inlet
of the secondary drainage system at its design flow. The design
rainfall shall be based on the 100-year hourly rainfall rate indi-
cated in Figure 1611.1 or on other rainfall rates determined
from approved local weather data.

(Equation 16-35)

R = 5.2(ds + dh)
For SI: R = 0.0098(ds + dh)
where:
dh
= Additional depth of water on the undeflected roof
above the inlet of secondary drainage system at its
design flow (i.e., the hydraulic head), in inches (mm).
= Depth of water on the undeflected roof up to the inlet of
secondary drainage system when the primary drainage
system is blocked (i.e., the static head), in inches (mm).

ds

R

= Rain load on the undeflected roof, in psf (kN/m2).
When the phrase “undeflected roof” is used, deflec-
tions from loads (including dead loads) shall not be
considered when determining the amount of rain on the
roof.

1611.2 Ponding instability. For roofs with a slope less than 1/4
inch per foot [1.19 degrees (0.0208 rad)], the design calcula-
tions shall include verification of adequate stiffness to preclude
progressive deflection in accordance with Section 8.4 of ASCE
7.

1611.3 Controlled drainage. Roofs equipped with hardware
to control the rate of drainage shall be equipped with a second-
ary drainage system at a higher elevation that limits accumula-
tion of water on the roof above that elevation. Such roofs shall
be designed to sustain the load of rainwater that will accumu-
late on them to the elevation of the secondary drainage system
plus the uniform load caused by water that rises above the inlet
of the secondary drainage system at its design flow determined
from Section 1611.1. Such roofs shall also be checked for
ponding instability in accordance with Section 1611.2.

332

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:39:59 AM

30

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

[P] FIGURE 1611.1
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (INCHES) EASTERN UNITED STATES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
Source: National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

333

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:01 AM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

[P] FIGURE 1611.1—continued
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (INCHES) CENTRAL UNITED STATES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
Source: National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.

334

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:03 AM

32

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

[P] FIGURE 1611.1—continued
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (INCHES) WESTERN UNITED STATES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
Source: National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

335

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:05 AM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
Source: National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.

[P] FIGURE 1611.1—continued
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (INCHES) ALASKA

336

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:07 AM

34

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
Source: National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC.

[P] FIGURE 1611.1—continued
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (INCHES) HAWAII

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

337

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:09 AM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

SECTION 1612
FLOOD LOADS

1612.1 General. Within flood hazard areas as established in
Section 1612.3, all new construction of buildings, structures
and portions of buildings and structures, including substantial
improvement and restoration of substantial damage to build-
ings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist
the effects of flood hazards and flood loads. For buildings that
are located in more than one flood hazard area, the provisions
associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area shall
apply.
1612.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown herein.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base
flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
This definition of “Basement” is limited in application to the
provisions of Section 1612 (see “Basement” in Section 502.1).
DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of
the following two areas:
1. Area with a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any year; or
2. Area designated as a flood hazard area on a commu-
nity’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION . The elevation of the
“design flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum
specified on the community’s legally designated flood hazard
map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood eleva-
tion shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the
building’s perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified
on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where
a depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number
shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet (610 mm).
DRY FLOODPROOFING. A combination of design modifi-
cations that results in a building or structure, including the
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, being water tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capacity to resist loads
as identified in ASCE 7.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any buildings and struc-
tures for which the “start of construction” commenced before
the effective date of the community’s first flood plain manage-
ment code, ordinance or standard. “Existing construction” is
also referred to as “existing structures.”

EXISTING STRUCTURE. See “Existing construction.”
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition
of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any con-
struction material capable of withstanding direct and pro-
longed contact with floodwaters without sustaining any
damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two
areas:
1. The area within a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or
greater chance of flooding in any year.
2. The area designated as a flood hazard area on a commu-
nity’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA SUBJECT TO HIGH-VELOC-
ITY WAVE ACTION. Area within the flood hazard area that
is subject to high-velocity wave action, and shown on a Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other flood hazard map as Zone
V, VO, VE or V1-30.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official
map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the com-
munity.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency containing the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map (FBFM), the water surface elevation of the
base flood and supporting technical data.
FLOODWAY. The channel of the river, creek or other water-
course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increas-
ing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
LOWEST FLOOR. The floor of the lowest enclosed area,
in c lud ing b a s em en t , bu t ex c lud ing any un f in i sh ed o r
flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking,
building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure
is not built so as to render the structure in violation of this sec-
tion.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land area subject
to flood hazards and shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or
other flood hazard map as Zone A, AE, A1-30, A99, AR, AO,
AH, V, VO, VE or V1-30.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date of issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing struc-
tures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, recon-
s t ru c t ion , reh ab i l i ta t ion , add i t ion , p lacemen t o r o the r
improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The

338

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:09 AM

36

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

actual start of construction means the first placement of perma-
nent construction of a building (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, instal-
lation of pilings or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation
(such as clearing, excavation, grading or filling), the installa-
tion of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, foot-
ings, piers or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or
the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building.
For a substantial improvement, the actual “start of construc-
tion” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained
by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruc-
tion, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair
is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a building required to
correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
identified by the building official and that are the mini-
mum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
2. Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish
flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall
adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood haz-
ard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood haz-
ard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance

Study for [INSERT NAME OF JURISDICTION],” dated [INSERT

DATE OF ISSUANCE], as amended or revised with the accompa-
nying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along
with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and
supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be part of this section.
1612.3.1 Design flood elevations. Where design flood ele-
vations are not included in the flood hazard areas estab-
lished in Section 1612.3, or where floodways are not
designated, the building official is authorized to require the
applicant to:
1. Obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood eleva-
tion and floodway data available from a federal, state
or other source; or

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

2. D e t e rm i n e t h e d e s i g n f l o o d e l e v a t i o n a n d / o r
floodway in accordance with accepted hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering practices used to define
special flood hazard areas. Determinations shall be
undertaken by a registered design professional who
shall document that the technical methods used
reflect currently accepted engineering practice.
1612.3.2 Determination of impacts. In riverine flood haz-
ard areas where design flood elevations are specified but
floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall pro-
vide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the pro-
posed work will not increase the design flood elevation
more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdic-
tion of the applicable governing authority.

1612.4 Design and construction. The design and construction
of buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas,
including flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action, shall be in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7 and
with ASCE 24.

1612.5 Flood hazard documentation. The following docu-
mentation shall be prepared and sealed by a registered design
professional and submitted to the building official:
1. For construction in flood hazard areas not subject to
high-velocity wave action:
1.1. The elevation of the lowest floor, including the
basement, as required by the lowest floor eleva-
tion inspection in Section 110.3.3.
1.2. For fully enclosed areas below the design flood
elevation where provisions to allow for the auto-
matic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet
the minimum requirements in Section 2.6.2.1 of
ASCE 24, construction documents shall include
a statement that the design will provide for equal-
ization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance
with Section 2.6.2.2 of ASCE 24.
1.3. For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings,
construction documents shall include a statement
that the dry floodproofing is designed in accor-
dance with ASCE 24.
2. For construction in f lood hazard areas subject to
high-velocity wave action:
2.1. The elevation of the bottom of the lowest hori-
zontal structural member as required by the low-
est floor elevation inspection in Section 110.3.3.
2.2. Construction documents shall include a state-
ment that the building is designed in accordance
with ASCE 24, including that the pile or column
founda tion and bu ild ing or s truc ture to be
attached thereto is designed to be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement
due to the effects of wind and flood loads acting
simultaneously on all building components, and
other load requirements of Chapter 16.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

339

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:10 AM

37

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

2.3. For breakaway walls designed to resist a nominal
load of less than 10 psf (0.48 kN/m2) or more than
20 psf (0.96 kN/m2), construction documents
shall include a statement that the breakaway wall
is designed in accordance with ASCE 24.

SECTION 1613
EARTHQUAKE LOADS

1613.1 Scope. Every structure, and portion thereof, including
nonstructural components that are permanently attached to
structures and their supports and attachments , shall be
designed and constructed to resist the effects of earthquake
motions in accordance with ASCE 7, excluding Chapter 14 and
Appendix 11A. The seismic design category for a structure is
permitted to be determined in accordance with Section 1613 or
ASCE 7.
Exceptions:
1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings, assigned to
Seismic Design Category A, B or C, or located where
the mapped short-period spectral response accelera-
tion, SS, is less than 0.4 g.
2. The seismic-force-resisting system of wood-frame
buildings that conform to the provisions of Section
2308 are not required to be analyzed as specified in
this section.
3. Agricultural storage structures intended only for inci-
dental human occupancy.
4. Structures that require special consideration of their
response characteristics and environment that are not
addressed by this code or ASCE 7 and for which other
regulations provide seismic criteria, such as vehicular
bridges, electrical transmission towers, hydraulic
structures, buried utility lines and their appurtenances
and nuclear reactors.
1613.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown herein.
DESIGN EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION. The earth-
quake ground motion that buildings and structures are specifi-
cally proportioned to resist in Section 1613.
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND
MOTION. The most severe earthquake effects considered by
this code.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS. For the purposes of determin-
ing seismic loads in ASCE 7, mechanical systems shall include
plumbing systems as specified therein.
ORTHOGONAL. To be in two horizontal directions, at 90
degrees (1.57 rad) to each other.
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY. A classification assigned
to a structure based on its occupancy category and the severity
of the design earthquake ground motion at the site.

SEISMIC-FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. That part of the
structural system that has been considered in the design to pro-
vide the required resistance to the prescribed seismic forces.
SITE CLASS. A classification assigned to a site based on the
types of soils present and their engineering properties as
defined in Section 1613.5.2.
SITE COEFFICIENTS. The values of Fa and Fv indicated in
Tables 1613.5.3(1) and 1613.5.3(2), respectively.
1613.3 Existing buildings. Additions, alterations, repairs or
change of occupancy of existing buildings shall be in accor-
dance with Chapter 34.
1613.4 Special inspections. Where required by Sections
1705.3 through 1705.3.5, the statement of special inspections
shall include the special inspections required by Section
1705.3.6.
1613.5 Seismic ground motion values. Seismic ground
motion values shall be determined in accordance with this sec-
tion.
1613.5.1 Mapped acceleration parameters. The parame-
ters Ss and S1 shall be determined from the 0.2 and 1-second
spectral response accelerations shown on Figures 1613.5(1)
through 1613.5(14). Where S1 is less than or equal to 0.04
and Ss is less than or equal to 0.15, the structure is permitted
to be assigned to Seismic Design Category A.

1613.5.2 Site class definitions. Based on the site soil prop-
erties, the site shall be classified as either Site Class A, B, C,
D, E or F in accordance with Table 1613.5.2. When the soil
properties are not known in sufficient detail to determine the
site class, Site Class D shall be used unless the building offi-
cial or geotechnical data determines that Site Class E or F
soil is likely to be present at the site.

1613.5.3 Site coefficients and adjusted maximum con-
sidered earthquake spectral response acceleration
parameters. The maximum considered earthquake spectral
response acceleration for short periods, SMS, and at 1-second
period, SM1, adjusted for site class effects shall be deter-
mined by Equations 16-36 and 16-37, respectively:

SMS = FaSs

SM1 = Fv S1

(Equation 16-36)

(Equation 16-37)

where:
Fa = Site coefficient defined in Table 1613.5.3(1).
Fv = Site coefficient defined in Table 1613.5.3(2).
SS = The mapped spectral accelerations for short periods
as determined in Section 1613.5.1.
S1 = The mapped spectral accelerations for a 1-second
period as determined in Section 1613.5.1.

340

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:10 AM

38

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

341

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1613.5.2
SITE CLASS DEFINITIONS

SITE
CLASS

SOIL PROFILE
NAME

AVERAGE PROPERTIES IN TOP 100 feet, SEE SECTION 1613.5.5

Soil shear wave velocity, v S , (ft/s) Standard penetration resistance, N Soil undrained shear strength, su , (psf)

A

Hard rock

v s
2,500 < v s
1,200 < v s
600 £ v s
v s
< 600
Any profile with more than 10 feet of soil having the following characteristics:
1. Plasticity index PI > 20,
2. Moisture content w ³ 40%, and
3. Undrained shear strength s u
< 500 psf

> 5,000

N/A

N/A

B

Rock

£ 5,000

N/A

N/A

C

Very dense soil and soft rock

£ 2,500

N > 50

s u
1,000 £ s u
s u
< 1,000

³ 2,000

D

Stiff soil profile

£ 1,200

15 £ N £ 50

£ 2,000

E

Soft soil profile

N < 15

E

—

F

—

Any profile containing soils having one or more of the following characteristics:
1. Soils vulnerable to potential failure or collapse under seismic loading such as liquefiable
soils, quick and highly sensitive clays, collapsible weakly cemented soils.
2. Peats and/or highly organic clays (H > 10 feet of peat and/or highly organic clay where
H = thickness of soil)
3. Very high plasticity clays (H > 25 feet with plasticity index PI > 75)
4. Very thick soft/medium stiff clays (H > 120 feet)

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. N/A = Not applicable

TABLE 1613.5.3(1)
VALUES OF SITE COEFFICIENT Fa

a

SITE
CLASS

MAPPED SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION AT SHORT PERIOD

Ss £ 0.25

Ss = 0.50

Ss = 0.75

Ss = 1.00

Ss ³ 1.25

A

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

B

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

C

1.2

1.2

1.1

1.0

1.0

D

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.1

1.0

E

2.5

1.7

1.2

0.9

0.9

F

Note b

Note b

Note b

Note b

Note b

a. Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral response acceleration at short period, Ss.
b. Values shall be determined in accordance with Section 11.4.7 of ASCE 7.

TABLE 1613.5.3(2)
VALUES OF SITE COEFFICIENT FV

a

SITE
CLASS

MAPPED SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION AT 1-SECOND PERIOD
S1 = 0.2
S1 = 0.3
S1 = 0.4

S1 £ 0.1

S1 ³ 0.5

A
B
C
D
E
F

0.8
1.0
1.7
2.4
3.5
Note b

0.8
1.0
1.6
2.0
3.2
Note b

0.8
1.0
1.5
1.8
2.8
Note b

0.8
1.0
1.4
1.6
2.4
Note b

0.8
1.0
1.3
1.5
2.4
Note b

a. Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral response acceleration at 1-second period, S1.
b. Values shall be determined in accordance with Section 11.4.7 of ASCE 7.

39

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:10 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1613.5.4 Design spectral response acceleration parame-
ters. Five-percent damped design spectral response acceler-
ation at short periods, SDS, and at 1-second period, SD1, shall
be determined from Equations 16-38 and 16-39, respec-
tively:

SDS =

2
3

SMS

(Equation 16-38)

SD1 =

2
3

SM1

(Equation 16-39)

where:
SMS = The maximum considered earthquake spectral
response accelerations for short period as deter-
mined in Section 1613.5.3.
SM1 = The maximum considered earthquake spectral
response accelerations for 1-second period as
determined in Section 1613.5.3.
1613.5.5 Site classification for seismic design. Site classi-
fication for Site Class C, D or E shall be determined from
Table 1613.5.5.

The notations presented below apply to the upper 100 feet
(30 480 mm) of the site profile. Profiles containing dis-
tinctly different soil and/or rock layers shall be subdivided
into those layers designated by a number that ranges from 1
to n at the bottom where there is a total of n distinct layers in
the upper 100 feet (30 480 mm). The symbol i then refers to
any one of the layers between 1 and n.

where:
vsi = The shear wave velocity in feet per second (m/s).
di = The thickness of any layer between 0 and 100 feet
(30 480 mm).
where:

v

d

d
v

s

i

= =
i
1
n

n

i

si

i

=

å

å

1

(Equation 16-40)

di

i

n

=

å

1

= 100 feet (30 480 mm)

Ni is the Standard Penetration Resistance (ASTM D 1586)
not to exceed 100 blows/foot (328 blows/m) as directly
measured in the field without corrections. When refusal is
met for a rock layer, Ni shall be taken as 100 blows/foot (328
blows/m).

N

d

d
N
where Ni and di in Equation 16-41 are for cohesionless soil,
cohesive soil and rock layers.

i

= =
i
1
n

n

i

i

i

=

å

å

1

(Equation 16-41)

N

d

d
N

ch

s

i

i

i

m

=

=

å

1

(Equation 16-42)

where:

d

d

i

s

i

m

=

=

å

1

Use di and Ni for cohesionless soil layers only in Equation
16-42.
ds = The total thickness of cohesionless soil layers in the
top 100 feet (30 480 mm).
m = The number of cohesionless soil layers in the top 100
feet (30 480 mm).
sui = The undrained shear strength in psf (kPa), not to
exceed 5,000 psf (240 kPa), ASTM D 2166 or D
2850.

s

d

d
s

u

c

i

ui

i

k

=

=

å

1

(Equation 16-43)

where:

d

d

i

c

i

k

=

=

å

1

dc = The total thickness of cohesive soil layers in the top
100 feet (30 480 mm).
k = The number of cohesive soil layers in the top 100 feet
(30 480 mm).
PI = The plasticity index, ASTM D 4318.

342

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

TABLE 1613.5.5
SITE CLASSIFICATIONa

SITE CLASS

v s

N Nch

or

su

E

< 600 ft/s

< 15

< 1,000 psf

D

600 to 1,200 ft/s

15 to 50

1,000 to 2,000 psf

C

1,200 to 2,500 ft/s

> 50

> 2,000

For SI: 1 foot per second = 304.8 mm per second, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.
a. If the sumethod is used and the N ch and su criteria differ, select the category with the softer soils (for example, use Site Class E instead of D).

40

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:11 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

w = The moisture content in percent, ASTM D 2216.
Where a site does not qualify under the criteria for Site
Class F and there is a total thickness of soft clay greater than
10 feet (3048 mm) where a soft clay layer is defined by: s u
500 psf (24 kPa), w ³ 40 percent, and PI > 20, it shall be clas-
sified as Site Class E.

<

The shear wave velocity for rock, Site Class B, shall be
either measured on site or estimated by a geotechnical engi-
neer or engineering geologist/seismologist for competent
rock with moderate fracturing and weathering. Softer and
more highly fractured and weathered rock shall either be
measured on site for shear wave velocity or classified as Site
Class C.
The hard rock category, Site Class A, shall be supported
by shear wave velocity measurements either on site or on
profiles of the same rock type in the same formation with an
equal or greater degree of weathering and fracturing. Where
hard rock conditions are known to be continuous to a depth
of 100 feet (30 480 mm), surficial shear wave velocity mea-
surements are permitted to be extrapolated to assess v s .
The rock categories, Site Classes A and B, shall not be
used if there is more than 10 feet (3048 mm) of soil between
the rock surface and the bottom of the spread footing or mat
foundation.
1613.5.5.1 Steps for classifying a site.
1. Check for the four categories of Site Class F
requiring site-specific evaluation. If the site corre-
sponds to any of these categories, classify the site
as Site Class F and conduct a site-specific evalua-
tion.
2. Check for the existence of a total thickness of soft
clay > 10 feet (3048 mm) where a soft clay layer is
defined by: s u
< 500 psf (24 kPa), w ³ 40 percent
and PI > 20. If these criteria are satisfied, classify
the site as Site Class E.

3. Categorize the site using one of the following three
methods with v s , N , and s u and computed in all
cases as specified.
3.1. v s for the top 100 feet (30 480 mm)
(v s method).
3.2. N for the top 100 feet (30 480 mm)
(N method).
3.3. N ch for cohesionless soil layers (PI < 20)
in the top 100 feet (30 480 mm) and aver-
age, s u for cohesive soil layers (PI > 20) in
the top 100 feet (30 480 mm) ( s u method).
1613.5.6 Determination of seismic design category.
Structures classified as Occupancy Category I, II or III that
are located where the mapped spectral response accelera-
tion parameter at 1-second period, S1, is greater than or

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

equal to 0.75 shall be assigned to Seismic Design Category
E. Structures classified as Occupancy Category IV that are
located where the mapped spectral response acceleration
parameter at 1-second period, S1, is greater than or equal to
0.75 shall be assigned to Seismic Design Category F. All
other structures shall be assigned to a seismic design cate-
gory based on their occupancy category and the design
spectral response acceleration coefficients, SDS and SD1,
determined in accordance with Section 1613.5.4 or the site-
specific procedures of ASCE 7. Each building and structure
shall be assigned to the more severe seismic design category
in accordance with Table 1613.5.6(1) or 1613.5.6(2), irre-
spective of the fundamental period of vibration of the struc-
ture, T.

TABLE 1613.5.6(1)
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY BASED ON
SHORT-PERIOD RESPONSE ACCELERATIONS

OCCUPANCY CATEGORY

VALUE OF SDS

SDS < 0.167g

0.167g £ SDS < 0.33g

0.33g £ SDS < 0.50g

0.50g £ SDS

I or II

A

B

C

D

III

A

B

C

D

TABLE 1613.5.6(2)
SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY BASED ON
1-SECOND PERIOD RESPONSE ACCELERATION

OCCUPANCY CATEGORY

VALUE OF SD1

SD1 < 0.067g

0.067g £ SD1 < 0.133g

0.133g £ SD1 < 0.20g

0.20g £ SD1

I or II

A

B

C

D

III

A

B

C

D

IV

A

C

D

D

IV

A

C

D

D

1613.5.6.1 Alternative seismic design category deter-
mination. Where S1 is less than 0.75, the seismic design
category is permitted to be determined from Table
1613.5.6(1) alone when all of the following apply:

1. In each of the two orthogonal directions, the
approximate fundamental period of the structure,
Ta, in each of the two orthogonal directions deter-
mined in accordance with Section 12.8.2.1 of
ASCE 7, is less than 0.8 Ts determined in accor-
dance with Section 11.4.5 of ASCE 7.
2. In each of the two orthogonal directions, the fun-
damental period of the structure used to calculate
the story drift is less than Ts.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

343

16_ibc_2009pg343.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:54:49 PM

41

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

3. Equation 12.8-2 of ASCE 7 is used to determine
the seismic response coefficient, Cs.
4. The diaphragms are rigid as defined in Section
12.3.1 of ASCE 7 or, for diaphragms that are flexi-
ble, the distances between vertical elements of the
seismic-force-resisting system do not exceed 40
feet (12 192 mm).
1613.5.6.2 Simplified design procedure. Where the
alternate simplified design procedure of ASCE 7 is used,
the seismic design category shall be determined in accor-
dance with ASCE 7.

1613.6 Alternatives to ASCE 7. The provisions of Section
1613.6 shall be permitted as alternatives to the relevant provi-
sions of ASCE 7.

1613.6.1 Assumption of flexible diaphragm. Add the fol-
lowing text at the end of Section 12.3.1.1 of ASCE 7.

Diaphragms constructed of wood structural panels or
untopped steel decking shall also be permitted to be ideal-
ized as flexible, provided all of the following conditions are
met:

1. Toppings of concrete or similar materials are not
placed over wood structural panel diaphragms except
for nonstructural toppings no greater than 11/2 inches
(38 mm) thick.
2. E a c h l i n e o f v e r t i c a l e l em e n t s o f t h e s e i s-
mic-force-resisting system complies with the allow-
able story drift of Table 12.12-1.
3. Vertical elements of the seismic-force-resisting sys-
tem are light-frame walls sheathed with wood struc-
tural panels rated for shear resistance or steel sheets.
4. Portions of wood structural panel diaphragms that
cantilever beyond the vertical elements of the lat-
eral-force-resisting system are designed in accor-
dance with Section 4.2.5.2 of AF&PA SDPWS.
1613.6.2 Additional seismic-force-resisting systems for
seismically isolated structures. Add the following excep-
tion to the end of Section 17.5.4.2 of ASCE 7:

Exception: For isolated structures designed in accor-
dance with this standard, the Structural System Limita-
tions and the Building Height Limitations in Table
12.2-1 for ordinary steel concentrically braced frames
(OCBFs) as defined in Chapter 11 and ordinary moment
frames (OMFs) as defined in Chapter 11 are permitted to
be taken as 160 feet (48 768 mm) for structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, provided that the
following conditions are satisfied:
1. The value of RI as defined in Chapter 17 is taken as
1.
2. For OMFs and OCBFs, design is in accordance
with AISC 341.

1613.6.3 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprin-
kler systems designed and installed in accordance with
NFPA 13 shall be deemed to meet the requirements of Sec-
tion 13.6.8 of ASCE 7.
1613.6.4 Autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) masonry
shear wall design coefficients and system limitations.
Add the following text at the end of Section 12.2.1 of ASCE
7:

For ordinary reinforced AAC masonry shear walls used
in the seismic-force-resisting system of structures,
the
response modification factor, R, shall be permitted to be
taken as 2, the deflection amplification factor, Cd, shall be
permitted to be taken as 2 and the system overstrength fac-
tor, Wo, shall be permitted to be taken as 21/2. Ordinary rein-
forced AAC masonry shear walls shall not be limited in
height for buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category B,
shall be limited in height to 35 feet (10 668 mm) for build-
ings assigned to Seismic Design Category C and are not per-
mitted for buildings assigned to Seismic Design Categories
D, E and F.
For ordinary plain (unreinforced) AAC masonry shear
walls used in the seismic-force-resisting system of struc-
tures, the response modification factor, R, shall be permitted
to be taken as 11/2, the deflection amplification factor, Cd,
shall be permitted to be taken as 11/2 and the system
overstrength factor, Wo, shall be permitted to be taken as 21/2.
Ordinary plain (unreinforced) AAC masonry shear walls
shall not be limited in height for buildings assigned to Seis-
mic Design Category B and are not permitted for buildings
assigned to Seismic Design Categories C, D, E and F.
1613.6.5 Seismic controls for elevators. Seismic switches
in accordance with Section 8.4.10 of ASME A17.1 shall be
deemed to comply with Section 13.6.10.3 of ASCE 7.
1613.6.6 Steel plate shear wall height limits. Modify Sec-
tion 12.2.5.4 of ASCE 7 to read as follows:
12.2.5.4 Increased building height limit for steel-
braced frames, special steel plate shear walls and spe-
cial reinforced concrete shear walls. The height limits
in Table 12.2-1 are permitted to be increased from 160
feet (48 768 mm) to 240 feet (75 152 mm) for structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E and from
100 feet (30 480 mm) to 160 feet (48 768 mm) for struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category F that have
steel-braced frames, special steel plate shear walls or
special reinforced concrete cast-in-place shear walls and
that meet both of the following requirements:
1. The structure shall not have an extreme torsional
irregularity as defined in Table 12.2-1 (horizontal
structural irregularity Type 1b).
2. The braced frames or shear walls in any one plane
shall resist no more than 60 percent of the total
seismic forces in each direction, neglecting acci-
dental torsional effects.

344

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:12 AM

42

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1613.6.7 Minimum distance for building separation. All
buildings and structures shall be separated from adjoining
structures. Separations shall allow for the maximum inelas-
tic response displacement (dM). dM shall be determined at
critical locations with consideration for both translational
and torsional displacements of the structure using Equation
16-44.
dC

max

d

(Equation 16-44)

d

M

=

I

where:
Cd = Deflection amplification factor in Table 12.2-1 of
ASCE 7.
dmax = Maximum displacement defined in Section 12.8.4.3
of ASCE 7.
= Importance factor in accordance with Section 11.5.1
of ASCE 7.
Adjacent buildings on the same property shall be sepa-
rated by a distance not less than dMT, determined by Equa-
tion 16-45.

I

d

MT

=

2

)

(

d

M

1

+

(

d

M

2

2

)

(Equation 16-45)

where:
dM1, dM2 = The maximum inelastic response displace-
ments of the adjacent buildings in accordance
with Equation 16-44.
Where a structure adjoins a property line not common to a
public way, the structure shall also be set back from the
property line by not less than the maximum inelastic
response displacement, dM, of that structure.
Exceptions:
1. Smaller separations or property line setbacks shall
be permitted when justified by rational analyses.
2. Buildings and structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category A, B or C.

1613.6.8 HVAC ductwork with Ip = 1.5. Seismic supports
are not required for HVAC ductwork with Ip = 1.5 if either of
the following conditions is met for the full length of each
duct run:
1. HVAC ducts are suspended from hangers 12 inches
(305 mm) or less in length with hangers detailed to
avoid significant bending of the hangers and their
attachments, or
2. HVAC ducts have a cross-sectional area of less than 6
square feet (0.557 m2)..
1613.7 ASCE 7, Section 11.7.5. Modify ASCE 7, Section
11.7.5 to read as follows:
11.7.5 Anchorage of walls. Walls shall be anchored to the
roof and all floors and members that provide lateral support
for the wall or that are supported by the wall. The anchorage

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

shall provide a direct connection between the walls and the
roof or floor construction. The connections shall be capable
of resisting the forces specified in Section 11.7.3 applied
horizontally, substituted for E in load combinations of Sec-
tion 2.3 or 2.4.

SECTION 1614
STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY

1614.1 General. Buildings classified as high-rise buildings in
accordance with Section 403 and assigned to Occupancy Cate-
gory III or IV shall comply with the requirements of this sec-
tion. Frame structures shall comply with the requirements of
Section 1614.3. Bearing wall structures shall comply with the
requirements of Section 1614.4.
1614.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of Section 1614, have the meanings shown herein.
BEARING WALL STRUCTURE. A building or other struc-
ture in which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily
supported by walls.
FRAME STRUCTURE. A building or other structure in
which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily sup-
ported by columns.
1614.3 Frame structures. Frame structures shall comply with
the requirements of this section.
1614.3.1 Concrete frame structures. Frame structures
constructed primarily of reinforced or prestressed concrete,
either cast-in-place or precast, or a combination of these,
shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 Sections 7.13,
13.3.8.5, 13.3.8.6, 16.5, 18.12.6, 18.12.7 and 18.12.8 as
applicable. Where ACI 318 requires that nonprestressed
reinforcing or prestressing steel pass through the region
bounded by the longitudinal column reinforcement, that
reinforcing or prestressing steel shall have a minimum nom-
inal tensile strength equal to two-thirds of the required
one-way vertical strength of the connection of the floor or
roof system to the column in each direction of beam or slab
reinforcement passing through the column.
Exception: Where concrete slabs with continuous rein-
forcing having an area not less than 0.0015 times the con-
crete area in each of two orthogonal directions are
present and are either monolithic with or equivalently
bonded to beams, girders or columns, the longitudinal
reinforcing or prestressing steel passing through the col-
umn reinforcement shall have a nominal tensile strength
of one-third of the required one-way vertical strength of
the connection of the floor or roof system to the column
in each direction of beam or slab reinforcement passing
through the column.
1614.3.2 Structural steel, open web steel joist or joist
girder, or composite steel and concrete frame structures.
Frame structures constructed with a structural steel frame or
a frame composed of open web steel joists, joist girders with
or without other structural steel elements or a frame com-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

345

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:12 AM

43

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

posed of composite steel or composite steel joists and rein-
forced concrete elements shall conform to the requirements
of this section.
1614.3.2.1 Columns. Each column splice shall have the
minimum design strength in tension to transfer the
design dead and live load tributary to the column
between the splice and the splice or base immediately
below.
1614.3.2.2 Beams. End connections of all beams and
girders shall have a minimum nominal axial tensile
strength equal to the required vertical shear strength for
allowable stress design (ASD) or two-thirds of the
required shear strength for load and resistance factor
design (LRFD) but not less than 10 kips (45 kN). For the
purpose of this section, the shear force and the axial ten-
sile force need not be considered to act simultaneously.
Exception: Where beams, girders, open web joist and
joist girders support a concrete slab or concrete slab
on metal deck that is attached to the beam or girder
with not less than 3/8-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) headed
shear studs, at a spacing of not more than 12 inches
(305 mm) on center, averaged over the length of the
member, or other attachment having equivalent shear
strength, and the slab contains continuous distributed
reinforcement in each of two orthogonal directions
with an area not less than 0.0015 times the concrete
area, the nominal axial tension strength of the end
connection shall be permitted to be taken as half the
required vertical shear strength for ASD or one-third
of the required shear strength for LRFD, but not less
than 10 kips (45 kN).
1614.4 Bearing wall structures. Bearing wall structures shall
have vertical ties in all load-bearing walls and longitudinal ties,
transverse ties and perimeter ties at each floor level in accor-
dance with this section and as shown in Figure 1614.4.
1614.4.1 Concrete wall structures. Precast bearing wall
structures constructed solely of reinforced or prestressed
concrete, or combinations of these shall conform to the
requirements of Sections 7.13, 13.3.8.5 and 16.5 of ACI
318.
1614.4.2 Other bearing wall structures. Ties in bearing
wall structures other than those covered in Section 1614.4.1
shall conform to this section.
1614.4.2.1 Longitudinal ties. Longitudinal ties shall
consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous
or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced
members framing to, within or across walls; or connec-
tions of continuous framing members to walls. Longitu-
dinal ties shall extend across interior load-bearing walls
and shall connect to exterior load-bearing walls and shall
be spaced at not greater than 10 feet (3038 mm) on cen-
ter. Ties shall have a minimum nominal tensile strength,
TT, given by Equation 16-46. For ASD the minimum
nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as

1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the
tie.

(Equation 16-46)

TT = wLS £ aTS
where:
L = The span of the horizontal element in the direc-
tion of the tie, between bearing walls, feet (m).
w = The weight per unit area of the floor or roof in the
span being tied to or across the wall, psf (N/m2).
S = The spacing between ties, feet (m).
aT = A coefficient with a value of 1,500 pounds per
foot (2.25 kN/m) for masonry bearing wall struc-
tures and a value of 375 pounds per foot (0.6
kN/m) for structures with bearing walls of
cold-formed steel light-frame construction.
1614.4.2.2 Transverse ties. Transverse ties shall consist
of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or
spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced mem-
bers framing to, within or across walls; or connections of
continuous framing members to walls. Transverse ties
shall be placed no farther apart than the spacing of load-
bearing walls. Transverse ties shall have minimum nomi-
nal tensile strength TT, given by Equation 16-46. For
ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be per-
mitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress
times the area of the tie.
1614.4.2.3 Perimeter ties. Perimeter ties shall consist of
continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced
decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members
framing to, within or across walls; or connections of con-
tinuous framing members to walls. Ties around the per-
imeter of each floor and roof shall be located within 4
feet (1219 mm) of the edge and shall provide a nominal
strength in tension not less than Tp, given by Equation
16-47. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength
shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable
tensile stress times the area of the tie.

(Equation 16-47)

Tp = 200w £ bT
For SI:
Tp = 90.7w £ bT
where:
w = As defined in Section 1614.4.2.1.
bT = A coefficient with a value of 16,000 pounds
(7200 kN) for structures with masonry bearing
walls and a value of 4,000 pounds (1300 kN) for
structures with bearing walls of cold-formed
steel light-frame construction.
1614.4.3.4 Vertical ties. Vertical ties shall consist of
continuous or spliced reinforcing, continuous or spliced
members, wall sheathing or other engineered systems.
Vertical tension ties shall be provided in bearing walls

346

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:12 AM

44

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

and shall be continuous over the height of the building.
The minimum nominal tensile strength for vertical ties
within a bearing wall shall be equal to the weight of the
wall within that story plus the weight of diaphragm tribu-
tary to the wall in the story below. No fewer than two ties
shall be provided for each wall. The strength of each tie
need not exceed 3,000 pounds per foot (450 kN/m) of
wall tributary to the tie for walls of masonry construction
or 750 pounds per foot (140 kN/m) of wall tributary to
the tie for walls of cold-formed steel light-frame con-
struction.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

347

16_ibc_2009pg347.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:51:16 PM

45

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(1)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR THE CONTERMINOUS UNITED STATES OF
0.2 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

348

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:32 AM

46

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(1)—continued
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR THE CONTERMINOUS UNITED STATES OF
0.2 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

349

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:40:44 AM

47

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(2)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR THE CONTERMINOUS UNITED STATES
OF 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

350

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:41:03 AM

48

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(2)—continued
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR THE CONTERMINOUS UNITED STATES
OF 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

351

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:41:14 AM

49

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

L

C
E
T
S

I

,
)

G
N
P

I

M

A
D

L

A
C

I

T

I

R
C

F

O

%

5

(

N
O

I

T

A
R
E
L
E
C
C
A
E
S
N
O

P
S
E
R

L

A
R

O

)

.

(

3
T
5
3
1
6
1

C
E
P
S
C
E
E
R
S
U
G

2
0
F
F

I

.

1

N
O
G

I

E
R
R
O

F

N
O

I

T

O
M

D
N
U
O
R
G

E
K
A
U
Q
H

T

R
A
E
D
E
R
E
D
S
N
O
C

I

M

U

M

I

X
A

M

352

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:41:36 AM

50

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
1
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

I

I

I

I

)

.

I

5

(

(

3

i
t

F

T

%

—

n
o
c

5
3
1
6
1

T
T
d
e
u
n

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
A
U
A
Q
R
E
E
H
L
R
T
E
R
U
C
A
G
C
E
A
F
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

2
0

.

353

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:41:59 AM

51

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
1
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

T
T

I

I

.

I

I

(

)

(

5

4

F

T

%

5
3
1
6
1

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
E
H
F
L
T
E
R
C
A
C
E
A
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

I

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

0
1

.

354

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:03 AM

52

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
1
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

I

I

I

I

)

.

I

5

(

(

4

i
t

F

T

%

—

n
o
c

5
3
1
6
1

T
T
d
e
u
n

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
A
U
A
Q
R
E
E
H
L
R
T
E
R
U
C
A
G
C
E
A
F
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

0
1

.

355

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:15 AM

53

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
2
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

T
T

I

I

.

I

I

(

)

(

5

5

F

T

%

5
3
1
6
1

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
E
H
F
L
T
E
R
C
A
C
E
A
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

I

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

2
0

.

356

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:23 AM

54

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
2
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

T
T

I

I

.

I

I

(

)

(

5

6

F

T

%

5
3
1
6
1

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
E
H
F
L
T
E
R
C
A
C
E
A
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

I

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

0
1

.

357

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:31 AM

55

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

L

C
E
T
F
S

I

I

I

3

,
)

O
G
N
N
O
P
M
G
A
E
D
R
R
A
O
C

L

F
T

N
R
O
C
O
M
O

T
F

I

I

I

T

I

.

I

(

)

(

5

7

%

5
3
1
6
1

T
F
T

D
N
N
E
U
C
O
R
R
E
G
P
E
K
E
A
R
U
N
U
Q
O
G
H
A
R
R
A
E
E
L
E
D
C
E
C
R
A
E
D
E
S
S
N
N
O
O
P
C
S
E
U
R

M

I

M

I

L
X
A
A
R

M

T

C
E
P
S
C
E
S

2

.

0

358

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:39 AM

56

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

B
S
S
A

I

,
)
I

L
F
C
O
E
T
3
N
S
O
G
G
E
N
R
P
M
R
O
A
D

F
L

N
A
O
C

I
I

T
T

I

I

.

I

I

(

)

(

5

8

F

T

%

5
3
1
6
1

O
M
R
C
D
N
O
U
O
R
G
N
E
O
K
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
E
H
F
L
T
E
R
C
A
C
E
A
D
E
E
S
R
N
E
O
D
P
S
S
N
E
O
R
C
A
R
U

M

L

I

T

M

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

0
1

.

359

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:47 AM

57

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(9)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR REGION 4 OF
0.2 AND 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

360

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:42:55 AM

58

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(10)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR HAWAII OF
0.2 AND 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

361

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:43:05 AM

59

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

I

I

I

I

)

,
)

L

L

F

F

1
1

T
T

C
F
O
E
T
A
S
K
S
A
G
N
A
P
R
M
O
A
D
N
O
A
C
O
M
R
D
C
N
U
O
O
R
G
E
N
K
O
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
H
E
T
L
F
R
E
A
C
E
C
A
D
E
E
R
S
N
E
D
O
S
P
N
S
E
O
R
C

5
3
1
6
1

%

5

(

I

T

(

.

I

B
S
S
A

L

I

I

L

M

A
U
R

M

T

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

2
0

.

362

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:43:17 AM

60

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

I

I

I

I

)

,
)

L

L

F

F

2
1

T
T

C
F
O
E
T
A
S
K
S
A
G
N
A
P
R
M
O
A
D
N
O
A
C
O
M
R
D
C
N
U
O
O
R
G
E
N
K
O
E
A
R
U
A
U
Q
R
G
H
E
T
L
F
R
E
A
C
E
C
A
D
E
E
R
S
N
E
D
O
S
P
N
S
E
O
R
C

5
3
1
6
1

%

5

(

I

T

(

.

I

B
S
S
A

L

I

I

L

M

A
U
R

M

T

I

M

C
X
E
A
P
S
C
E
S

.

0
1

363

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:43:27 AM

61

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(13)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR PUERTO RICO, CULEBRA, VIEQUES, ST. THOMAS,
ST. JOHN AND ST. CROIX OF 0.2 AND 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

364

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:43:37 AM

62

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1613.5(14)
MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION FOR GUAM AND TUTUILLA OF
0.2 AND 1.0 SEC SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

365

16_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:43:59 AM

63

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL DESIGN

FIGURE 1614.4
LONGITUDINAL, PERIMETER, TRANSVERSE AND VERTICAL TIES

366

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

16_ibc_2009pg366.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:14)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:32:49 PM

64

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

CHAPTER 17

SECTION 1701
GENERAL

1701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
quality, workmanship and requirements for materials covered.
Materials of construction and tests shall conform to the appli-
cable standards listed in this code.
1701.2 New materials. New building materials, equipment,
appliances, systems or methods of construction not provided
for in this code, and any material of questioned suitability pro-
posed for use in the construction of a building or structure, shall
be subjected to the tests prescribed in this chapter and in the
approved rules to determine character, quality and limitations
of use.
1701.3 Used materials. The use of second-hand materials that
meet the minimum requirements of this code for new materials
shall be permitted.

SECTION 1702
DEFINITIONS

1702.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized
agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing
inspection services, when such agency has been approved.
APPROVED FABRICATOR. An established and qualified
person, firm or corporation approved by the building official
pursuant to Chapter 17 of this code.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate stating
that materials and products meet specified standards or that
work was done in compliance with approved construction doc-
uments.

DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM. Those architectural,
electrical and mechanical systems and their components that
require design in accordance with Chapter 13 of ASCE 7 and
for which the component importance factor, Ip, is greater than 1
in accordance with Section 13.1.3 of ASCE 7.
FABRICATED ITEM. Structural, load-bearing or lateral
load-resisting assemblies consisting of materials assembled
prior to installation in a building or structure, or subjected to
operations such as heat treatment, thermal cutting, cold work-
ing or reforming after manufacture and prior to installation in a
building or structure. Materials produced in accordance with
standard specifications referenced by this code, such as rolled
structural steel shapes, steel-reinforcing bars, masonry units,
and wood structural panels or in accordance with a standard,
listed in Chapter 35, which provides requirements for quality
control done under the supervision of a third-party quality con-
trol agency shall not be considered “fabricated items.”

➡

➡

INSPECTION CERTIFICATE. An identification applied on
a product by an approved agency containing the name of the
manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics,
and the name and identification of an approved agency that
indicates that the product or material has been inspected and
evaluated by an approved agency (see Section 1703.5 and
“Label,” “Manufacturer’s designation” and “Mark”).
INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. Thin
film liquid mixture applied to substrates by brush, roller, spray
or trowel which expands into a protective foamed layer to pro-
vide fire-resistant protection of the substrates when exposed to
flame or intense heat.
MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. An assem-
blage of structural elements assigned to provide support and
stability for the overall structure. The system generally
receives wind loading from more than one surface.
MASTIC FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. Liquid mixture
applied to a substrate by brush, roller, spray or trowel that pro-
vides fire-resistant protection of a substrate when exposed to
flame or intense heat.
SPECIAL INSPECTION. Inspection as herein required of
the materials, installation, fabrication, erection or placement of
components and connections requiring special expertise to
ensure compliance with approved construction documents and
referenced standards (see Section 1704).
SPECIAL INSPECTION, CONTINUOUS. The full-time
observation of work requiring special inspection by an
approved special inspector who is present in the area where the
work is being performed.
SPECIAL INSPECTION, PERIODIC. The part-time or
intermittent observation of work requiring special inspection
by an approved special inspector who is present in the area
where the work has been or is being performed and at the com-
pletion of the work.
S P R AY E D F I R E - R E S I S TA N T M AT E R I A L S .
Cementitious or fibrous materials that are sprayed to provide
fire-resistant protection of the substrates.
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. The visual observation of

the structural system by a registered design professional for
general conformance to the approved construction documents.
Structural observation does not include or waive the responsi-
bility for the inspection required by Section 110, 1704 or other
sections of this code.

SECTION 1703
APPROVALS

1703.1 Approved agency. An approved agency shall provide
all information as necessary for the building official to deter-
mine that the agency meets the applicable requirements.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

367

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:56 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1703.1.1 Independence. An approved agency shall be
objective, competent and independent from the contractor
responsible for the work being inspected. The agency shall
also disclose possible conflicts of interest so that objectivity
can be confirmed.
1703.1.2 Equipment. An approved agency shall have ade-
quate equipment to perform required tests. The equipment
shall be periodically calibrated.
1703.1.3 Personnel. An approved agency shall employ
experienced personnel educated in conducting, supervising
and evaluating tests and/or inspections.
1703.2 Written approval. Any material, appliance, equip-
ment, system or method of construction meeting the require-
men ts o f th is code sha l l be approved in w r i t ing af ter
satisfactory completion of the required tests and submission of
required test reports.
1703.3 Approved record. For any material, appliance, equip-
men t, sys tem or me thod of cons truc tion tha t has been
approved, a record of such approval, including the conditions
and limitations of the approval, shall be kept on file in the build-
ing official’s office and shall be open to public inspection at
appropriate times.
1703.4 Performance. Specific information consisting of test
reports conducted by an approved testing agency in accordance
with standards referenced in Chapter 35, or other such informa-
tion as necessary, shall be provided for the building official to
determine that the material meets the applicable code require-
ments.
1703.4.1 Research and investigation. Sufficient technical
data shall be submitted to the building official to substanti-
ate the proposed use of any material or assembly. If it is
determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory proof
of performance for the use intended, the building official
shall approve the use of the material or assembly subject to
the requirements of this code. The costs, reports and investi-
gations required under these provisions shall be paid by the
applicant.
1703.4.2 Research reports. Supporting data, where neces-
sary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not
specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid
research reports from approved sources.
1703.5 Labeling. Where materials or assemblies are required
by this code to be labeled, such materials and assemblies shall
be labeled by an approved agency in accordance with Section
1703. Products and materials required to be labeled shall be
labeled in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections
1703.5.1 through 1703.5.3.
1703.5.1 Testing. An approved agency shall test a represen-
tative sample of the product or material being labeled to the
relevant standard or standards. The approved agency shall
maintain a record of the tests performed. The record shall
provide sufficient detail to verify compliance with the test
standard.

1703.5.2 Inspection and identification. The approved
agency shall periodically perform an inspection, which
shall be in-plant if necessary, of the product or material that
is to be labeled. The inspection shall verify that the labeled
product or material is representative of the product or mate-
rial tested.
1703.5.3 Label information. The label shall contain the
manufacturer’s or distributor’s identification, model num-
ber, serial number or definitive information describing the
product or material’s performance characteristics and
approved agency’s identification.

1703.6 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services. Where
structural components or other items regulated by this code are
not visible for inspection after completion of a prefabricated
assembly, the applicant shall submit a report of each prefabri-
cated assembly. The report shall indicate the complete details
of the assembly, including a description of the assembly and its
components, the basis upon which the assembly is being evalu-
ated, test results and similar information and other data as nec-
essary for the building official to determine conformance to
this code. Such a report shall be approved by the building offi-
cial.

1703.6.1 Follow-up inspection. The applicant shall pro-
vide for special inspections of fabricated items in accor-
dance with Section 1704.2.
1703.6.2 Test and inspection records. Copies of necessary
test and inspection records shall be filed with the building
official.

➡

SECTION 1704
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1704.1 General. Where application is made for construction as
described in this section, the owner or the registered design
professional in responsible charge acting as the owner’s agent
shall employ one or more approved agencies to perform
inspections during construction on the types of work listed
under Section 1704. These inspections are in addition to the
inspections identified in Section 110.
The special inspector shall be a qualified person who shall
demonstrate competence, to the satisfaction of the building
official, for the inspection of the particular type of construction
or operation requiring special inspection. The registered
design professional in responsible charge and engineers of
record involved in the design of the project are permitted to act
as the approved agency and their personnel are permitted to act
as the special inspector for the work designed by them, pro-
vided those personnel meet the qualification requirements of
this section to the satisfaction of the building official. The spe-
cial inspector shall provide written documentation to the build-
ing official demonstrating his or her competence and relevant
experience or training. Experience or training shall be consid-
ered relevant when the documented experience or training is
related in complexity to the same type of special inspection
activities for projects of similar complexity and material quali-

368

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:57 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ties. These qualifications are in addition to qualifications speci-
fied in other sections of this code.
Exceptions:
1. Special inspections are not required for work of a
minor nature or as warranted by conditions in the
jurisdiction as approved by the building official.
2. Special inspections are not required for building com-
ponents unless the design involves the practice of pro-
fessional engineering or architecture as defined by
applicable state statutes and regulations governing
the professional registration and certification of engi-
neers or architects.
3. Unless otherwise required by the building official,
special inspections are not required for Group U
occupancies that are accessory to a residential occu-
pancy including, but not limited to, those listed in
Section 312.1.
1704.1.1 Statement of special inspections. The applicant
shall submit a statement of special inspections prepared by
the registered design professional in responsible charge in
accordance with Section 107.1 as a condition for issuance.
This statement shall be in accordance with Section 1705.
Exceptions:
1. A statement of special inspections is not required
for structures designed and constructed in accor-
dance with the conventional construction provi-
sions of Section 2308.
2. The statement of special inspections is permitted
to be prepared by a qualified person approved by
the building official for construction not designed
by a registered design professional.

1704.1.2 Report requirement. Special inspectors shall
keep records of inspections. The special inspector shall fur-
nish inspection reports to the building official, and to the
registered design professional
in responsible charge.
Reports shall indicate that work inspected was or was not
completed in conformance to approved construction docu-
ments. Discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate
attention of the contractor for correction. If they are not cor-
rected, the discrepancies shall be brought to the attention of
the building official and to the registered design profes-
sional in responsible charge prior to the completion of that
phase of the work. A final report documenting required spe-
cial inspections and correction of any discrepancies noted in
the inspections shall be submitted at a point in time agreed
upon prior to the start of work by the applicant and the
building official.

1704.2 Inspection of fabricators. Where fabrication of struc-
tural load-bearing members and assemblies is being performed
on the premises of a fabricator’s shop, special inspection of the
fabricated items shall be required by this section and as
required elsewhere in this code.
1704.2.1 Fabrication and implementation procedures.
The special inspector shall verify that the fabricator main-
tains detailed fabrication and quality control procedures that

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

provide a basis for inspection control of the workmanship
and the fabricator’s ability to conform to approved con-
struction documents and referenced standards. The special
inspector shall review the procedures for completeness and
adequacy relative to the code requirements for the fabrica-
tor’s scope of work.

Exception: Special inspections as required by Section
1704.2 shall not be required where the fabricator is
approved in accordance with Section 1704.2.2.

1704.2.2 Fabricator approval. Special
inspections
required by Section 1704 are not required where the work is
done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved
to perform such work without special inspection. Approval
shall be based upon review of the fabricator’s written proce-
dural and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of
fabrication practices by an approved special inspection
agency. At completion of fabrication, the approved fabrica-
tor shall submit a certificate of compliance to the building
official stating that the work was performed in accordance
with the approved construction documents.

1704.3 Steel construction. The special inspections for steel
elements of buildings and structures shall be as required by
Section 1704.3 and Table 1704.3.

Exceptions:

1. Special inspection of the steel fabrication process
shall not be required where the fabricator does not
perform any welding, thermal cutting or heating oper-
ation of any kind as part of the fabrication process. In
such cases, the fabricator shall be required to submit a
detailed procedure for material control that demon-
strates the fabricator’s ability to maintain suitable
records and procedures such that, at any time during
the fabrication process, the material specification,
grade and mill test reports for the main stress-carrying
elements are capable of being determined.
2. The special inspector need not be continuously pres-
ent during welding of the following items, provided
the materials, welding procedures and qualifications
of welders are verified prior to the start of the work;
periodic inspections are made of the work in progress
and a visual inspection of all welds is made prior to
completion or prior to shipment of shop welding.
2.1. Single-pass fillet welds not exceeding 5/16 inch
(7.9 mm) in size.
2.2. Floor and roof deck welding.
2.3. Welded studs when used for structural dia-
phragm.
2.4. Welded sheet steel for cold-formed steel
members.
2.5. Welding of stairs and railing systems.

1704.3.1 Welding. Welding inspection and welding inspec-
tor qualification shall be in accordance with this section.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

369

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:57 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.3
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF STEEL CONSTRUCTION

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

CONTINUOUS

PERIODIC

REFERENCED
STANDARDa

IBC REFERENCE

1. Material verification of high-strength bolts, nuts and
washers:

a. Identification markings to conform to ASTM
standards specified in the approved
construction documents.

b.Manufacturer’s certificate of compliance
required.

2.

Inspection of high-strength bolting:

a. Snug-tight joints.

b.Pretensioned and slip-critical joints using
turn-of-nut with matchmarking, twist-off bolt or
direct tension indicator methods of installation.

c. Pretensioned and slip-critical joints using
turn-of-nut without matchmarking or calibrated
wrench methods of installation.

3. Material verification of structural steel and
cold-formed steel deck:

a. For structural steel, identification markings to
conform to AISC 360.

b. For other steel, identification markings to conform
to ASTM standards specified in the approved
construction documents.

c.Manufacturer’s certified test reports.

4. Material verification of weld filler materials:

a. Identification markings to conform to AWS
specification in the approved construction
documents.

b.Manufacturer’s certificate of compliance required.

5.

Inspection of welding:

a. Structural steel and cold-formed steel deck:

1) Complete and partial joint penetration groove
welds.

2) Multipass fillet welds.

3) Single-pass fillet welds > 5/16²

4) Plug and slot welds.

5) Single-pass fillet welds £ 5/16²

6) Floor and roof deck welds.

¾

—

—

—

X

—

—

—

¾

¾

X

X

X

X

¾

—

AISC 360,
Section A3.3 and
applicable ASTM
material standards

—

—

AISC 360,
Section M2.5

1704.3.3

AISC 360,
Section M5.5

Applicable ASTM
material standards

AISC 360,
Section A3.5 and
applicable AWS
A5 documents

—

¾

—

AWS D1.1

1704.3.1

AWS D1.3

X

X

X

X

—

X

X

X

X

X

¾

¾

¾

—

X

X

370

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

(continued)

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:58 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.3—continued
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF STEEL CONSTRUCTION

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

CONTINUOUS PERIODIC

REFERENCED
STANDARDa

IBC
REFERENCE

b.Reinforcing steel:

1) Verification of weldability of reinforcing steel
other than ASTM A 706.

2) Reinforcing steel resisting flexural and axial
forces in intermediate and special moment
frames, and boundary elements of special
structural walls of concrete and shear
reinforcement.

3) Shear reinforcement.

4) Other reinforcing steel.

6.

Inspection of steel frame joint details for compliance:

a. Details such as bracing and stiffening.

b. Member locations.

c. Application of joint details at each connection.

¾

X

X

¾

—

—

—

X

¾

—

X

X

X

X

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Where applicable, see also Section 1707.1, Special inspection for seismic resistance.

AWS D1.4 ACI 318: Section 3.5.2

—

—

1704.3.2

1704.3.1.1 Structural steel. Welding inspection and
welding inspector qualification for structural steel shall
be in accordance with AWS D1.1.
1704.3.1.2 Cold-formed steel. Welding inspection and
welding inspector qualification for cold-formed steel
floor and roof decks shall be in accordance with AWS
D1.3.
1704.3.1.3 Reinforcing steel. Welding inspection and
welding inspector qualification for reinforcing steel shall
be in accordance with AWS D1.4 and ACI 318.
1704.3.2 Details. The special inspector shall perform an
inspection of the steel frame to verify compliance with the
details shown on the approved construction documents,
such as bracing, stiffening, member locations and proper
application of joint details at each connection.
1704.3.3 High-strength bolts. Installation of high-strength
bolts shall be inspected in accordance with AISC 360.
1704.3.3.1 General. While the work is in progress, the
special inspector shall determine that the requirements
for bolts, nuts, washers and paint; bolted parts and instal-
lation and tightening in such standards are met. For bolts
requiring pretensioning, the special inspector shall
observe the preinstallation testing and calibration proce-
dures when such procedures are required by the installa-
tion method or by project plans or specifications;
determine that all plies of connected materials have been
drawn together and properly snugged and monitor the
installation of bolts to verify that the selected procedure
for installation is properly used to tighten bolts. For
joints required to be tightened only to the snug-tight con-

dition, the special inspector need only verify that the con-
nected materials have been drawn together and properly
snugged.

1704.3.3.2 Periodic monitoring. Monitoring of bolt
installation for pretensioning is permitted to be per-
formed on a periodic basis when using the turn-of-nut
method with matchmarking techniques, the direct ten-
sion indicator method or the alternate design fastener
(twist-off bolt) method. Joints designated as snug tight
need be inspected only on a periodic basis.

1704.3.3.3 Continuous monitoring. Monitoring of bolt
installation for pretension ing us ing the calibrated
wrench method or the turn-of-nut method without
matchmarking shall be performed on a continuous basis.

1704.3.4 Cold-formed steel trusses spanning 60 feet or
greater. Where a cold-formed steel truss clear span is 60
feet (18 288 mm) or greater, the special inspector shall ver-
ify that the temporary installation restraint/bracing and the
permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing are
installed in accordance with the approved truss submittal
package.

1704.4 Concrete construction. The special inspections and
verifications for concrete construction shall be as required by
this section and Table 1704.4.

Exception: Special inspections shall not be required for:

1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three
stories or less above grade plane that are fully sup-
ported on earth or rock.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

371

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:58 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

2. Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of
buildings three stories or less above grade plane that
are fully supported on earth or rock where:
2.1. The footings support walls of light-frame con-
struction;
2.2. The footings are designed in accordance with
Table 1809.7; or
2.3. The structural design of the footing is based
on a specified compressive strength, f ¢c, no
greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch

(psi) (17.2 MPa), regardless of the compres-
sive strength specified in the construction
documents or used in the footing construction.

3. Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on
the ground, including prestressed slabs on grade,
where the effective prestress in the concrete is less
than 150 psi (1.03 MPa).
4. Concrete foundation walls constructed in accordance
with Table 1807.1.6.2.
5. Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.

TABLE 1704.4
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

CONTINUOUS

PERIODIC

1. Inspection of reinforcing steel, including
prestressing tendons, and placement.

2. Inspection of reinforcing steel welding in
accordance with Table 1704.3, Item 5b.

3. Inspection of bolts to be installed in concrete
prior to and during placement of concrete where
allowable loads have been increased or where
strength design is used.

4. Inspection of anchors installed in hardened
concrete.

5. Verifying use of required design mix.

6. At the time fresh concrete is sampled to fabricate
specimens for strength tests, perform slump and
air content tests, and determine the temperature
of the concrete.

7. Inspection of concrete and shotcrete placement
for proper application techniques.

8. Inspection for maintenance of specified curing
temperature and techniques.

9. Inspection of prestressed concrete:
a. Application of prestressing forces.
b.Grouting of bonded prestressing tendons in
the seismic-force-resisting system.

10. Erection of precast concrete members.

11. Verification of in-situ concrete strength, prior to
stressing of tendons in posttensioned concrete
and prior to removal of shores and forms from
beams and structural slabs.

12. Inspect formwork for shape, location and
dimensions of the concrete member being
formed.

¾

¾

X

—

¾

X

X

¾

X
X

¾

¾

—

X

¾

¾

X

X

¾

¾

X

¾

X

X

X

REFERENCED
STANDARDa

IBC REFERENCE

ACI 318: 3.5, 7.1-7.7

1913.4

AWS D1.4
ACI 318: 3.5.2

ACI 318:
8.1.3, 21.2.8

ACI 318:
3.8.6, 8.1.3, 21.2.8

—

1911.5,
1912.1

1912.1

ACI 318: Ch. 4, 5.2-5.4

1904.2.2, 1913.2,
1913.3

ASTM C 172
ASTM C 31
ACI 318: 5.6, 5.8

1913.10

ACI 318: 5.9, 5.10

1913.6, 1913.7, 1913.8

ACI 318: 5.11-5.13

1913.9

ACI 318: 18.20
ACI 318: 18.18.4

ACI 318: Ch. 16

ACI 318: 6.2

ACI 318: 6.1.1

¾

¾

—

—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Where applicable, see also Section 1707.1, Special inspection for seismic resistance.

372

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:58 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1704.4.1 Materials. In the absence of sufficient data or doc-
umentation providing evidence of conformance to quality
standards for materials in Chapter 3 of ACI 318, the build-
ing official shall require testing of materials in accordance
with the appropriate standards and criteria for the material
in Chapter 3 of ACI 318. Weldability of reinforcement,
except that which conforms to ASTM A 706, shall be
determined in accordance with the requirements of Section
3.5.2 of ACI 318.

1704.5 Masonry construction. Masonry construction shall be
inspected and verified in accordance with the requirements of
Sections 1704.5.1 through 1704.5.3, depending on the occu-
pancy category of the building or structure.

Exception: Special inspections shall not be required for:

1. Empirically designed masonry, glass unit masonry or
masonry veneer designed by Section 2109, 2110 or
Chapter 14, respectively, or by Chapter 5, 6 or 7 of
TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, respectively, when they
are part of structures classified as Occupancy Cate-
gory I, II or III in accordance with Section 1604.5.
2. Masonry foundation walls constructed in accordance
w i t h T a b l e 1 8 0 7 . 1 . 6 . 3 ( 1 ) , 1 8 0 7 . 1 . 6 . 3 ( 2 ) ,
1807.1.6.3(3) or 1807.1.6.3(4).
3. Masonry fireplaces, masonry heaters or masonry
chimneys installed or constructed in accordance with
Section 2111, 2112 or 2113, respectively.

1704.5.1 Empirically designed masonry, glass unit
masonry and masonry veneer in Occupancy Category
IV. The minimum special inspection program for empirically
designed masonry, glass unit masonry or masonry veneer
designed by Section 2109, 2110 or Chapter 14, respectively,
or by Chapter 5, 6 or 7 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, respec-
tively, in structures classified as Occupancy Category IV, in
accordance with Section 1604.5, shall comply with Table
1704.5.1.

1704.5.2 Engineered masonry in Occupancy Category I,
II or III. The minimum special inspection program for
masonry designed by Section 2107 or 2108 or by chapters
other than Chapter 5, 6 or 7 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 in
structures classified as Occupancy Category I, II or III, in
accordance with Section 1604.5, shall comply with Table
1704.5.1.

1704.5.3 Engineered masonry in Occupancy Category
IV. The minimum special inspection program for masonry
designed by Section 2107 or 2108 or by chapters other than
Chapter 5, 6 or 7 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 in structures
classified as Occupancy Category IV, in accordance with
Section 1604.5, shall comply with Table 1704.5.3.

1704.6 Wood construction. Special inspections of the fabrica-
tion process of prefabricated wood structural elements and
assemblies shall be in accordance with Section 1704.2. Special
inspections of site-built assemblies shall be in accordance with
this section.

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1704.6.1 High-load diaphragms. High-load diaphragms
designed in accordance with Table 2306.2.1(2) shall be
installed with special inspections as indicated in Section
1704.1. The special inspector shall inspect the wood struc-
tural panel sheathing to ascertain whether it is of the grade
and thickness shown on the approved building plans. Addi-
tionally, the special inspector must verify the nominal size
of framing members at adjoining panel edges, the nail or sta-
ple diameter and length, the number of fastener lines and
that the spacing between fasteners in each line and at edge
margins agrees with the approved building plans.
1704.6.2 Metal-plate-connected wood trusses spanning
60 feet or greater. Where a truss clear span is 60 feet (18
288 mm) or greater, the special inspector shall verify that the
temporary installation restraint/bracing and the permanent
individual truss member restraint/bracing are installed in
accordance with the approved truss submittal package.
1704.7 Soils. Special inspections for existing site soil condi-
tions, fill placement and load-bearing requirements shall be as
required  by  this  section  and Table 1704.7.  The approved
geotechnical report, and the construction documents prepared
by the registered design professionals shall be used to deter-
mine compliance. During fill placement, the special inspector
shall determine that proper materials and procedures are used
in accordance with the provisions of the approved geotechnical
report.
Exception: Where Section 1803 does not require reporting
of materials and procedures for fill placement, the special
inspector shall verify that the in-place dry density of the
compacted fill is not less than 90 percent of the maximum
dry density at optimum moisture content determined in
accordance with ASTM D 1557.
1704.8 Driven deep foundations. Special inspections shall be
performed during installation and testing of driven deep foun-
dation elements as required by Table 1704.8. The approved
geotechnical report, and the construction documents prepared
by the registered design professionals, shall be used to deter-
mine compliance.
1704.9 Cast-in-place deep foundations. Special inspections
sh a l l b e p e r fo rm ed du r ing in s t a l l a t ion and t e s t ing o f
cast-in-place deep foundation elements as required by Table
1704.9. The approved geotechnical report, and the construc-
tion documents prepared by the registered design profession-
als, shall be used to determine compliance.
1704.10 Helical pile foundations. Special inspections shall be
performed continuously during installation of helical pile
foundations. The information recorded shall include installa-
tion equipment used, pile dimensions, tip elevations, final
depth, final installation torque and other pertinent installation
data as required by the registered design professional in
responsible charge. The approved geotechnical report and the
construction documents prepared by the registered design pro-
fessional shall be used to determine compliance.
1704.11 Vertical masonry foundation elements. Special
inspection shall be performed in accordance with Section
1704.5 for vertical masonry foundation elements.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

373

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:59 AM

7

374

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.5.1
LEVEL 1 REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF MASONRY CONSTRUCTION

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION

REFERENCE FOR CRITERIA

CONTINUOUS

PERIODIC

IBC SECTION

TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5a

TMS 602/ACI
530.1/ASCE 6a

1. Compliance with required inspection pro-
visions of the construction documents and
the approved submittals shall be verified.

—

X

—

—

Art. 1.5

2. Verification of f'm and f'AAC prior to con-
struction except where specifically
exempted by this code.

—

X

—

—

Art. 1.4B

3. Verification of slump flow and VSI as
delivered to the site for self-consolidating
grout.

X

—

—

—

Art. 1.5B.1.b.3

4. As masonry construction begins, the following shall be verified to ensure compliance:

a. Proportions of site-prepared mortar.

—

X

—

—

Art. 2.6A

b. Construction of mortar joints.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.3B

c. Location of reinforcement,
connectors, prestressing tendons
and anchorages.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.4, 3.6A

d. Prestressing technique.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.6B

e. Grade and size of prestressing
tendons and anchorages.

—

X

—

—

Art. 2.4B, 2.4H

5. During construction the inspection program shall verify:

a. Size and location of structural
elements.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.3F

b. Type, size and location of anchors,
including other details of anchorage
of masonry to structural members,
frames or other construction.

—

X

—

Sec. 1.2.2(e),
1.16.1

—

c. Specified size, grade and type of
reinforcement, anchor bolts,
prestressing tendons and
anchorages.

—

X

—

Sec. 1.15

Art. 2.4, 3.4

d. Welding of reinforcing bars.

X

—

—

Sec. 2.1.9.7.2,
3.3.3.4(b)

—

e. Preparation, construction and
protection of masonry during cold
weather (temperature below 40°F)
or hot weather (temperature above
90°F).

—

X

Sec. 2104.3,
2104.4

—

Art. 1.8C,
1.8D

f. Application and measurement of
prestressing force.

X

—

—

—

Art. 3.6B

(continued)

8

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:55:59 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.5.1—continued
LEVEL 1 REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF MASONRY CONSTRUCTION

FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION

REFERENCE FOR CRITERIA

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

CONTINUOUS

PERIODIC

IBC SECTION

TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5a

TMS 602/ACI
530.1/ASCE 6a

6. Prior to grouting, the following shall be verified to ensure compliance:

a. Grout space is clean.

b. Placement of reinforcement and
connectors, and prestressing
tendons and anchorages.

c. Proportions of site-prepared grout
and prestressing grout for bonded
tendons.

d. Construction of mortar joints.

7. Grout placement shall be verified to
ensure compliance:

a. Grouting of prestressing bonded
tendons.

8. Preparation of any required grout speci-
mens, mortar specimens and/or prisms
shall be observed.

—

—

—

—

X

X

—

For SI:
°C = [(°F) - 32]/1.8.
a. The specific standards referenced are those listed in Chapter 35.

X

X

X

X

—

—

X

—

—

—

—

—

—

Sec. 2105.2.2,
2105.3

—

Art. 3.2D

Sec. 1.13

Art. 3.4

—

—

—

—

—

Art. 2.6B

Art. 3.3B

Art. 3.5

Art. 3.6C

Art. 1.4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

375

17_ibc_2009pg375.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 11:36:43 AM

9

376

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.5.3
LEVEL 2 REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF MASONRY CONSTRUCTION

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION

CONTINUOUS

PERIODIC

REFERENCE FOR CRITERIA

IBC SECTION

TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5a

TMS 602/ACI
530.1/ASCE 6a

1. Compliance with required inspection provi-
sions of the construction documents and the
approved submittals.

—

X

—

—

Art. 1.5

2. Verification of f'm and f'AAC prior to construc-
tion and for every 5,000 square feet during
construction.

—

X

—

—

Art. 1.4B

3. Verification of proportions of materials in
premixed or preblended mortar and grout as
delivered to the site.

—

X

—

—

Art. 1.5B

4. Verification of slump flow and VSI as deliv-
ered to the site for self-consolidating grout.

X

—

—

—

Art. 1.5B.1.b.3

5. The following shall be verified to ensure compliance:

a. Proportions of site-prepared mortar,
grout and prestressing grout for bonded
tendons.

—

X

—

—

Art. 2.6A

b. Placement of masonry units and
construction of mortar joints.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.3B

c. Placement of reinforcement, connectors
and prestressing tendons and
anchorages.

—

X

—

Sec. 1.15

Art. 3.4, 3.6A

d. Grout space prior to grout.

X

—

—

—

Art. 3.2D

e. Placement of grout.

X

—

—

—

Art. 3.5

f. Placement of prestressing grout.

X

—

—

—

Art. 3.6C

g. Size and location of structural elements.

—

X

—

—

Art. 3.3F

h. Type, size and location of anchors,
including other details of anchorage of
masonry to structural members, frames
or other construction.

X

—

—

Sec.1.2.2(e),
1.16.1

—

i. Specified size, grade and type of
reinforcement, anchor bolts,
prestressing tendons and anchorages.

—

X

—

Sec. 1.15

Art. 2.4, 3.4

j. Welding of reinforcing bars.

X

—

—

Sec. 2.1.9.7.2,
3.3.3.4 (b)

—

k. Preparation, construction and protection
of masonry during cold weather
(temperature below 40°F) or hot
weather (temperature above 90°F).

—

X

Sec. 2104.3,
2104.4

—

Art. 1.8C, 1.8D

l. Application and measurement of
prestressing force.

X

—

—

—

Art. 3.6B

6. Preparation of any required grout specimens
and/or prisms shall be observed.

X

—

Sec. 2105.2.2,
2105.3

—

Art. 1.4

For SI:
°C = [(°F) - 32]/1.8, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. The specific standards referenced are those listed in Chapter 35.

10

17_ibc_2009pg376.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 11:55:54 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

TABLE 1704.7
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF SOILS

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION TASK

CONTINUOUS DURING TASK LISTED PERIODICALLY DURING TASK LISTED

1. Verify materials below shallow foundations are adequate to
achieve the design bearing capacity.

2. Verify excavations are extended to proper depth and have
reached proper material.

3. Perform classification and testing of compacted fill
materials.

4. Verify use of proper materials, densities and lift thicknesses
during placement and compaction of compacted fill.

5. Prior to placement of compacted fill, observe subgrade and
verify that site has been prepared properly.

—

—

—

X

—

X

X

X

—

X

TABLE 1704.8
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF DRIVEN DEEP FOUNDATION ELEMENTS

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION TASK

CONTINUOUS DURING TASK LISTED PERIODICALLY DURING TASK LISTED

1. Verify element materials, sizes and lengths comply with the
requirements.

2. Determine capacities of test elements and conduct additional
load tests, as required.

3. Observe driving operations and maintain complete and
accurate records for each element.

4. Verify placement locations and plumbness, confirm type and
size of hammer, record number of blows per foot of
penetration, determine required penetrations to achieve design
capacity, record tip and butt elevations and document
any damage to foundation element.

5. For steel elements, perform additional inspections in
accordance with Section 1704.3.

6. For concrete elements and concrete-filled elements, perform
additional inspections in accordance with Section 1704.4.

7. For specialty elements, perform additional inspections as
determined by the registered design professional in
responsible charge.

X

X

X

X

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

TABLE 1704.9
REQUIRED VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF CAST-IN-PLACE DEEP FOUNDATION ELEMENTS

VERIFICATION AND INSPECTION TASK

CONTINUOUS DURING TASK LISTED PERIODICALLY DURING TASK LISTED

1. Observe drilling operations and maintain complete and
accurate records for each element.

2. Verify placement locations and plumbness, confirm element
diameters, bell diameters (if applicable), lengths, embedment
into bedrock (if applicable) and adequate end-bearing strata
capacity. Record concrete or grout volumes.

3. For concrete elements, perform additional inspections in
accordance with Section 1704.4.

X

X

—

—

—

—

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

377

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:00 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1704.12 Sprayed fire-resistant materials. Special inspec-
tions for sprayed fire-resistant materials applied to floor, roof
and wall assemblies and structural members shall be in accor-
dance with Sections 1704.12.1 through 1704.12.6. Special
inspections shall be based on the fire-resistance design as des-
ignated in the approved construction documents. The tests set
forth in this section shall be based on samplings from specific
floor, roof and wall assemblies and structural members. Spe-
cial inspections shall be performed after the rough installation
of electrical, automatic sprinkler, mechanical and plumbing
systems and suspension systems for ceilings, where applicable.
1704.12.1 Physical and visual tests. The special inspec-
tions shall include the following tests and observations to
demonstrate compliance with the listing and the fire-resis-
tance rating:
1. Condition of substrates.
2. Thickness of application.
3. Density in pounds per cubic foot (kg/m3).
4. Bond strength adhesion/cohesion.
5. Condition of finished application.
1704.12.2 Structural member surface conditions. The
surfaces shall be prepared in accordance with the approved
fire-resistance design and the written instructions of
approved manufacturers. The prepared surface of structural
members to be sprayed shall be inspected before the appli-
cation of the sprayed fire-resistant material.
1704.12.3 Application. The substrate shall have a mini-
mum ambient temperature before and after application as
specified in the written instructions of approved manufac-
turers. The area for application shall be ventilated during
and after application as required by the written instructions
of approved manufacturers.
1704.12.4 Thickness. No more than 10 percent of the thick-
ness measurements of the sprayed fire-resistant materials
applied to floor, roof and wall assemblies and structural
members shall be less than the thickness required by the
approved fire-resistance design, but in no case less than the
minimum allowable
thickness
required by Section
1704.12.4.1.

1704.12.4.1 Minimum allowable thickness. For design
thicknesses 1 inch (25 mm) or greater, the minimum
allowable individual thickness shall be the design thick-
ness minus 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). For design thicknesses less
than 1 inch (25 mm), the minimum allowable individual
thickness shall be the design thickness minus 25 percent.
Thickness shall be determined in accordance with
ASTM E 605. Samples of the sprayed fire-resistant
materials shall be selected in accordance with Sections
1704.12.4.2 and 1704.12.4.3.

704.12.4.2 Floor, roof and wall assemblies. The thick-
ness of the sprayed fire-resistant material applied to
floor, roof and wall assemblies shall be determined in
accordance with ASTM E 605, making not less than four
measurements for each 1,000 square feet (93 m2) of the
sprayed area in each story or portion thereof.

378

1704.12.4.2.1 Cellular decks. Thickness measure-
ments shall be selected from a square area, 12 inches
by 12 inches (305 mm by 305 mm) in size. A mini-
mum of four measurements shall be made, located
symmetrically within the square area.
1704.12.4.2.2 Fluted decks. Thickness measure-
ments shall be selected from a square area, 12 inches
by 12 inches (305 mm by 305 mm) in size. A mini-
mum of four measurements shall be made, located
symmetrically within the square area, including one
each of the following: valley, crest and sides. The
average of the measurements shall be reported.
1704.12.4.3 Structural members. The thickness of the
sprayed fire-resistant material applied to structural mem-
bers shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E
605. Thickness testing shall be performed on not less
than 25 percent of the structural members on each floor.
1704.12.4.3.1 Beams and girders. At beams and
girders thickness measurements shall be made at nine
locations around the beam or girder at each end of a
12-inch (305 mm) length.
1704.12.4.3.2 Joists and trusses. At joists and
trusses, thickness measurements shall be made at
seven locations around the joist or truss at each end of
a 12-inch (305 mm) length.
1 7 0 4 . 1 2 . 4 . 3 . 3 W i d e - f l a n g e d c o l u m n s . A t
wide-flanged columns, thickness measurements shall
be made at 12 locations around the column at each end
of a 12-inch (305 mm) length.
1704.12.4.3.4 Hollow structural section and pipe
columns. At hollow structural section and pipe col-
umns, thickness measurements shall be made at a
minimum of four locations around the column at each
end of a 12-inch (305 mm) length.
1704.12.5 Density. The density of the sprayed fire-resistant
material shall not be less than the density specified in the
approved fire-resistance design. Density of the sprayed
fire-resistant material shall be determined in accordance
with ASTM E 605. The test samples for determining the
density of the sprayed fire-resistant materials shall be
selected as follows:
1. From each floor, roof and wall assembly at the rate of
not less than one sample for every 2,500 square feet
(232 m2) or portion thereof of the sprayed area in each
story.
2. From beams, girders, trusses and columns at the rate
of not less than one sample for each type of structural
member for each 2,500 square feet (232 m2) of floor
area or portion thereof in each story.
1704.12.6 Bond strength. The cohesive/adhesive bond
strength of the cured sprayed fire-resistant material applied
to floor, roof and wall assemblies and structural members
shall not be less than 150 pounds per square foot (psf) (7.18
kN/m2). The cohesive/adhesive bond strength shall be deter-
mined in accordance with the field test specified in ASTM E
736 by testing in-place samples of the sprayed fire-resistant

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:00 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

material selected in accordance with Sections 1704.12.6.1
through 1704.12.6.3.
1704.12.6.1 Floor, roof and wall assemblies. The test
samples for determining the cohesive/adhesive bond
strength of the sprayed fire-resistant materials shall be
selected from each floor, roof and wall assembly at the
rate of not less than one sample for every 2,500 square
feet (232 m2) of the sprayed area in each story or portion
thereof.
1704.12.6.2 Structural members. The test samples for
determining the cohesive/adhesive bond strength of the
sprayed fire-resistant materials shall be selected from
beams, girders, trusses, columns and other structural
members at the rate of not less than one sample for each
type of structural member for each 2,500 square feet
(232 m2) of floor area or portion thereof in each story.
1704.12.6.3 Primer, paint and encapsulant bond tests.
Bond tests to qualify a primer, paint or encapsulant shall
be conducted when the sprayed fire-resistant material is
applied to a primed, painted or encapsulated surface for
which acceptable bond-strength performance between
these coatings and the fire-resistant material has not been
determined. A bonding agent approved by the SFRM
manufacturer shall be applied to a primed, painted or
encapsulated surface where the bond strengths are found
to be less than required values.
1704.13 Mastic and intumescent fire-resistant coatings.
Special inspections for mastic and intumescent fire-resistant
coatings applied to structural elements and decks shall be in
accordance with AWCI 12-B. Special inspections shall be
based on the fire-resistance design as designated in the
approved construction documents.

1704.14 Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS). Spe-
cial inspections shall be required for all EIFS applications.
Exceptions:
1. Special inspections shall not be required for EIFS
applications installed over a water-resistive barrier
with a means of draining moisture to the exterior.
2. Special inspections shall not be required for EIFS
applications installed over masonry or concrete walls.
1704.14.1 Water-resistive barrier coating. A water-resis-
tive barrier coating complying with ASTM E 2570 requires
special inspection of the water-resistive barrier coating
when installed over a sheathing substrate.
1704.15 Special cases. Special inspections shall be required
for proposed work that is, in the opinion of the building official,
unusual in its nature, such as, but not limited to, the following
examples:
1. Construction materials and systems that are alternatives
to materials and systems prescribed by this code.
2. Unusual design applications of materials described in
this code.

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

3. Materials and systems required to be installed in accor-
dance with additional manufacturer’s instructions that
prescribe requirements not contained in this code or in
standards referenced by this code.
[F] 1704.16 Special inspection for smoke control. Smoke
control systems shall be tested by a special inspector.
[F] 1704.16.1 Testing scope. The test scope shall be as fol-
lows:
1. During erection of ductwork and prior to concealment
for the purposes of leakage testing and recording of
device location.
2. Prior to occupancy and after sufficient completion for
the purposes of pressure difference testing, flow mea-
surements and detection and control verification.
[F] 1704.16.2 Qualifications. Special inspection agencies
for smoke control shall have expertise in fire protection
engineering, mechanical engineering and certification as air
balancers.

SECTION 1705
STATEMENT OF SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1705.1 General. Where special inspection or testing is
required by Section 1704, 1707 or 1708, the registered design
professional in responsible charge shall prepare a statement of
special inspections in accordance with Section 1705 for
submittal by the  applicant (see Section 1704.1.1).
1705.2 Content of statement of special inspections. The
statement of special inspections shall identify the following:
1. The materials, systems, components and work required
to have special inspection or testing by the building offi-
cial or by the registered design professional responsible
for each portion of the work.
2. The type and extent of each special inspection.
3. The type and extent of each test.
4. Additional requirements for special inspection or testing
for seismic or wind resistance as specified in Section
1705.3, 1705.4, 1707 or 1708.
5. For each type of special inspection, identification as to
whether it will be continuous special inspection or peri-
odic special inspection.
1705.3 Seismic resistance. The statement of special inspec-
tions shall include seismic requirements for cases covered in
Sections 1705.3.1 through 1705.3.5.
Exception: Seismic requirements are permitted to be
excluded from the statement of special inspections for struc-
tures designed and constructed in accordance with the fol-
lowing:
1. The structure consists of light-frame construction; the
design spectral response acceleration at short periods,
SDS, as determined in Section 1613.5.4, does not

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

379

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:00 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

exceed 0.5g; and the height of the structure does not
exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm) above grade plane; or
2. The structure is constructed using a reinforced
masonry structural system or reinforced concrete
structural system; the design spectral response accel-
eration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section
1613.5.4, does not exceed 0.5g, and the height of the
structure does not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm) above
grade plane; or
3. Detached one- or two-family dwellings not exceeding
two stories above grade plane, provided the structure
does not have any of the following plan or vertical
irregularities in accordance with Section 12.3.2 of
ASCE 7:
3.1. Torsional irregularity.
3.2. Nonparallel systems.
3.3. Stiffness irregularity—extreme soft story and
soft story.
3.4. Discontinuity in capacity—weak story.
1705.3.1 Seismic-force-resisting systems. The seismic-
force-resisting systems in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C, D, E or F, in accordance with Section
1613.
Exception: Requirements for the seismic-force-resist-
ing system are permitted to be excluded from the state-
ment of special inspections for steel systems in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C that are not spe-
cifically detailed for seismic resistance, with a response
modification coefficient, R, of 3 or less, excluding canti-
lever column systems.
1705.3.2 Designated seismic systems. Designated seismic
systems in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category
D, E or F.
1705.3.3 Seismic Design Category C. The following addi-
tional systems and components in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category C:
1. Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC)
du c two rk con t a in ing h a z a rdou s m a t e r i a l s and
anchorage of such ductwork.
2. Piping systems and mechanical units containing
flammable, combustible or highly toxic materials.
3. Anchorage of electrical equipment used for emer-
gency or standby power systems.
1705.3.4 Seismic Design Category D. The following addi-
tional systems and components in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D:
1. Systems required for Seismic Design Category C.
2. Exterior wall panels and their anchorage.
3. Suspended ceiling systems and their anchorage.

4. Access floors and their anchorage.
5. Steel storage racks and their anchorage, where the
importance factor is equal to 1.5 in accordance with
Section 15.5.3 of ASCE 7.
1705.3.5 Seismic Design Category E or F. The following
additional systems and components in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category E or F:

1. Systems required for Seismic Design Categories C
and D.
2. Electrical equipment.
1705.3.6 Seismic requirements in the statement of spe-
cial inspections. When Sections 1705.3 through 1705.3.5
specify that seismic requirements be included, the statement
of special inspections shall identify the following:

1. Th e d e s ign a t ed s e i sm i c sy s t em s and s e i sm i c -
force-resisting systems that are subject to special
inspections in accordance with Sections 1705.3
through 1705.3.5.
2. The additional special inspections and testing to be
provided as required by Sections 1707 and 1708 and
other applicable sections of this code, including the
applicable standards referenced by this code.
1705.4 Wind resistance. The statement of special inspections
shall include wind requirements for structures constructed in
the following areas:

1. In wind Exposure Category B, where the 3-second-gust
basic wind speed is 120 miles per hour (mph) (52.8 m/s) or
greater.
2. In wind Exposure Category C or D, where the 3-second-
gust basic wind speed is 110 mph (49 m/s) or greater.
1705.4.1 Wind requirements in the statement of special
inspections. When Section 1705.4 specifies that wind
requirements be included, the statement of special inspec-
tions shall identify the main wind-force-resisting systems
and wind-resisting components subject to special inspec-
tions as specified in Section 1705.4.2.

1705.4.2 Detailed requirements. The statement of special
inspections shall include at least the following systems and
components:

1. Roof cladding and roof framing connections.
2. Wall connections to roof and floor diaphragms and
framing.
3. Roof and floor diaphragm systems, including collec-
tors, drag struts and boundary elements.
4. Vertical wind-force-resisting systems, including
braced frames, moment frames and shear walls.
5. Wind-force-resisting system connections to the foun-
dation.

380

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:01 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

6. Fabrication and installation of systems or compo-
nents required to meet the impact-resistance require-
ments of Section 1609.1.2.
Exception: Fabrication of manufactured systems or
components that have a label indicating compliance with
the wind-load and impact-resistance requirements of this
code.

SECTION 1706
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS FOR
WIND REQUIREMENTS
1706.1 Special inspections for wind requirements. Special
inspections itemized in Sections 1706.2 through 1706.4, unless
exempted by the exceptions to Section 1704.1, are required for
buildings and structures constructed in the following areas:
1. In wind Exposure Category B, where the 3-second-gust
basic wind speed is 120 miles per hour (52.8 m/sec) or
greater.
2. In wind Exposure Categories C or D, where the 3-sec-
ond-gust basic wind speed is 110 mph (49 m/sec) or
greater.
1706.2 Structural wood. Continuous special inspection is
required during field gluing operations of elements of the main
windforce-resisting system. Periodic special inspection is
required for nailing, bolting, anchoring and other fastening of
components within the main windforce-resisting system,
including wood shear walls, wood diaphragms, drag struts,
braces and hold-downs.
Exception: Special inspection is not required for wood
shear walls, shear panels and diaphragms, including nailing,
bolting, anchoring and other fastening to other components
of the main windforce-resisting system, where the fastener
spacing of the sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) on
center.
1706.3 Cold-formed steel light-frame construction. Peri-
odic special inspection is required during welding operations
of elements of the main windforce-resisting system. Periodic
special inspection is required for screw attachment, bolting,
anchoring and other fastening of components within the main
windforce-resisting system, including shear walls, braces, dia-
phragms, collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs.
Exception: Special
inspection is not
required for
cold-formed steel light-frame shear walls, braces, dia-
phragms, collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs where
either of the following apply:
1. The sheathing is gypsum board or fiberboard.
2. The sheathing is wood structural panel or steel sheets
on only one side of the shear wall, shear panel or dia-
phragm assembly and the fastener spacing of the
sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) on center
(o.c.).

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1706.4 Wind-resisting components. Periodic special inspec-
tion is required for the following systems and components:
1. Roof cladding.
2. Wall cladding.

SECTION 1707
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS FOR
SEISMIC RESISTANCE
1707.1 Special inspections for seismic resistance. Special
inspections itemized in Sections 1707.2 through 1707.9, unless
exempted by the exceptions of Section 1704.1, 1705.3, or
1705.3.1, are required for the following:
1. The se ism ic - fo rce - res is t ing sy s tems in s t ruc tu res
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, as
determined in Section 1613.
2. Designated seismic systems in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
3. Architectural, mechanical and electrical components in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E
or F that are required in Sections 1707.6 and 1707.7.
1707.2 Structural steel. Special inspection for structural steel
shall be in accordance with the quality assurance plan require-
ments of AISC 341.
Exceptions:
1. Special inspections of structural steel in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C that are not
specifically detailed for seismic resistance, with a
response modification coefficient, R, of 3 or less,
excluding cantilever column systems.
2. For ordinary moment frames, ultrasonic and mag-
netic particle testing of complete joint penetration
groove welds are only required for demand critical
welds.
1707.3 Structural wood. Continuous special inspection is
required during field gluing operations of elements of the seis-
mic-force-resisting system. Periodic special inspection is
required for nailing, bolting, anchoring and other fastening of
components within the seismic-force-resisting system, includ-
ing wood shear walls, wood diaphragms, drag struts, braces,
shear panels and hold-downs.
Exception: Special inspection is not required for wood
shear walls, shear panels and diaphragms, including nailing,
bolting, anchoring and other fastening to other components
of the seismic-force-resisting system, where the fastener
spacing of the sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) on
center (o.c.).
1707.4 Cold-formed steel light-frame construction. Peri-
odic special inspection is required during welding operations
of elements of the seismic-force-resisting system. Periodic
special inspection is required for screw attachment, bolting,
anchoring and other fastening of components within the seis-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

381

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:01 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

➡

mic-force-resisting system, including shear walls, braces, dia-
phragms, collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs.
Exception: Special
inspection is not
required for
cold-formed steel light-frame shear walls, braces, dia-
phragms, collectors (drag struts) and hold-downs where
either of the following apply:
1. The sheathing is gypsum board or fiberboard.
2. The sheathing is wood structural panel or steel sheets
on only one side of the shear wall, shear panel or dia-
phragm assembly and the fastener spacing of the
sheathing is more than 4 inches (102 mm) o.c.
1707.5 Storage racks and access floors. Periodic special
inspection is required during the anchorage of access floors
and storage racks 8 feet (2438 mm) or greater in height in struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
1707.6 Architectural components. Periodic special inspec-
tion during the erection and fastening of exterior cladding, inte-
rior and exterior nonbearing walls and interior and exterior
veneer in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F.
Exceptions:
1. Special inspection is not required for exterior clad-
ding, interior and exterior nonbearing walls and inte-
rior and exterior veneer 30 feet (9144 mm) or less in
height above grade or walking surface.
2. Special inspection is not required for exterior clad-
ding and interior and exterior veneer weighing 5 psf
(24.5 N/m2) or less.
3. Spec ia l inspec t ion is no t requ i red fo r in te r io r
nonbearing walls weighing 15 psf (73.5 N/m2) or less.
1707.7 Mechanical and electrical components. Special
inspection for mechanical and electrical equipment shall be as
follows:
1. Periodic special inspection is required during the anchor-
age of electrical equipment for emergency or standby
power systems in structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category C, D, E or F;
2. Periodic special inspection is required during the instal-
lation of anchorage of other electrical equipment in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category E or F;
3. Periodic special inspection is required during installation
of piping systems intended to carry flammable, combus-
tible or highly toxic contents and their associated
mechanical units in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C, D, E or F;
4. Periodic special inspection is required during the instal-
lation of HVAC ductwork that will contain hazardous
materials in structures assigned to Seismic Design Cate-
gory C, D, E or F; and
5. Periodic special inspection is required during the instal-
lation of v ibration iso lation systems in structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F where
the construction documents require a nominal clearance
of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) or less between the equipment sup-
port frame and restraint.

➡

1707.8 Designated seismic system verifications. The special
inspector shall examine designated seismic systems requiring
seismic qualification in accordance with Section 1708.4 and
verify that the label, anchorage or mounting conforms to the
certificate of compliance.

1707.9 Seismic isolation system. Periodic special inspection
is required during the fabrication and installation of isolator
units and energy dissipation devices that are part of the seismic
isolation system.

SECTION 1708
STRUCTURAL TESTING FOR
SEISMIC RESISTANCE
1708.1 Testing and qualification for seismic resistance. The
testing and qualification specified in Sections 1708.2 through
1708.5, unless exempted from special inspections by the
exceptions of Section 1704.1, 1705.3 or 1705.3.1 are required
as follows:
1. The se ism ic - fo rce - res is t ing sy s tems in s t ruc tu res
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, as
determined in Section 1613 shall meet the requirements
of Sections 1708.2 and 1708.3, as applicable.
2. Designated seismic systems in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F subject to the spe-
cial certification requirements of ASCE 7 Section 13.2.2
are required to be tested in accordance with Section
1708.4.
3. Architectural, mechanical and electrical components in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E
or F with an Ip = 1.0 are required to be tested in accor-
dance with Section 1708.4 where the general design
requirements of ASCE 7 Section 13.2.1, Item 2 for man-
ufacturer’s certification are satisfied by testing.
4. The seismic isolation system in seismically isolated
structures shall meet the testing requirements of Section
1708.5.
1708.2 Concrete reinforcement. Where reinforcement com-
plying with ASTM A 615 is used to resist earthquake-induced
flexural and axial forces in special moment frames, special
structural walls and coupling beams connecting special struc-
tural walls, in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category
B, C, D, E or F as determined in Section 1613, the reinforce-
ment shall comply with Section 21.1.5.2 of ACI 318. Certified
mill test reports shall be provided for each shipment of such
reinforcement. Where reinforcement complying with ASTM
A 615 is to be welded, chemical tests shall be performed to
determine weldability in accordance with Section 3.5.2 of ACI
318.
1708.3 Structural steel. Testing for structural steel shall be in
accordance with the quality assurance plan requirements of
AISC 341.
Exceptions:
1. Testing for structural steel in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category C that are not specifically
detailed for seismic resistance, with a response modi-

382

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:02 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

fication coefficient, R, of 3 or less, excluding cantile-
ver column systems.
2. For ordinary moment frames, ultrasonic and mag-
netic particle testing of complete joint penetration
groove welds are only required for demand critical
welds.
1708.4 Seismic certification of nonstructural components.

The registered design professional shall state the applicable
seismic certification requirements for nonstructural compo-
nents and designated seismic systems on the construction doc-
uments.
1. The manufacturer of each designated seismic system
components subject to the provisions of ASCE 7 Section
13.2.2 shall test or analyze the component and its mount-
ing system or anchorage and submit a certificate of com-
pliance for review and acceptance by the registered
design professional responsible for the design of the des-
ignated seismic system and for approval by the building
official. Certification shall be based on an actual test on a
shake table, by three-dimensional shock tests, by an ana-
lytical method using dynamic characteristics and forces,
by the use of experience data (i.e., historical data demon-
strating acceptable seismic performance) or by more rig-
orous analysis providing for equivalent safety.
2. Manufacturer’s certification of compliance for the gen-
eral design requirements of ASCE 7 Section 13.2.1 shall
be based on analysis, testing or experience data.
1708.5 Seismically isolated structures. For required system
tests, see Section 17.8 of ASCE 7.

SECTION 1709
CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY
1709.1 Contractor responsibility. Each contractor responsi-
ble for the construction of a main wind- or seismic-force-resist-
ing sy s tem , de s igna ted se i sm ic sy s tem o r a w ind - o r
seismic-resisting component listed in the statement of special
inspections shall submit a written statement of responsibility to
the building official and the owner prior to the commencement
of work on the system or component. The contractor’s state-
ment of responsibility shall contain acknowledgement of
awareness of the special requirements contained in the state-
ment of special inspection.

SECTION 1710
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATIONS

1710.1 General. Where required by the provisions of Section
1710.2 or 1710.3, the owner shall employ a registered design
professional to perform structural observations as defined in
Section 1702.
Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural
observer shall submit to the building official a written state-
ment identifying the frequency and extent of structural obser-
vations.
At the conclusion of the work included in the permit, the
structural observer shall submit to the building official a written

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

statement that the site visits have been made and identify any
reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural
observer’s knowledge, have not been resolved.
1710.2 Structural observations for seismic resistance.
Structural observations shall be provided for those structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, as determined
in Section 1613, where one or more of the following conditions
exist:
1. The structure is classified as Occupancy Category III or
IV in accordance with Table 1604.5.
2. The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22 860
mm) above the base.
3. The structure is assigned to Seismic Design Category E,
is classified as Occupancy Category I or II in accordance
with Table 1604.5, and is greater than two stories above
grade plane.
4. When so designated by the registered design profes-
sional responsible for the structural design.
5. When such observation is specifically required by the
building official.

1710.3 Structural observations for wind requirements.
Structural observations shall be provided for those structures
sited where the basic wind speed exceeds 110 mph (49 m/sec)
determined from Figure 1609, where one or more of the fol-
lowing conditions exist:
1. The structure is classified as Occupancy Category III or
IV in accordance with Table 1604.5.
2. The building height of the structure is greater than 75 feet
(22 860 mm).
3. When so designated by the registered design profes-
sional responsible for the structural design.
4. When such observation is specifically required by the
building official.

SECTION 1711
DESIGN STRENGTHS OF MATERIALS
1711.1 Conformance to standards. The design strengths and
permissible stresses of any structural material that are identi-
fied by a manufacturer’s designation as to manufacture and
grade by mill tests, or the strength and stress grade is otherwise
confirmed to the satisfaction of the building official, shall con-
form to the specifications and methods of design of accepted
engineering practice or the approved rules in the absence of
applicable standards.
1711.2 New materials. For materials that are not specifically
provided for in this code, the design strengths and permissible
stresses shall be established by tests as provided for in Section
1712.

SECTION 1712
ALTERNATIVE TEST PROCEDURE

1712.1 General. In the absence of approved rules or other
approved standards, the building official shall make, or cause to

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

383

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:02 AM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

be made, the necessary tests and investigations; or the building
official shall accept duly authenticated reports from approved
agencies in respect to the quality and manner of use of new
materials or assemblies as provided for in Section 104.11. The
cost of all tests and other investigations required under the pro-
visions of this code shall be borne by the  applicant.

SECTION 1713
TEST SAFE LOAD

1713.1 Where required. Where proposed construction is not
capable of being designed by approved engineering analysis,
or where proposed construction design method does not com-
ply with the applicable material design standard, the system of
construction or the structural unit and the connections shall be
subjected to the tests prescribed in Section 1715. The building
official shall accept certified reports of such tests conducted by
an approved testing agency, provided that such tests meet the
requirements of this code and approved procedures.

SECTION 1714
IN-SITU LOAD TESTS

1714.1 General. Whenever there is a reasonable doubt as to the
stability or load-bearing capacity of a completed building,
structure or portion thereof for the expected loads, an engineer-
ing assessment shall be required. The engineering assessment
shall involve either a structural analysis or an in-situ load test,
or both. The structural analysis shall be based on actual mate-
rial properties and other as-built conditions that affect stability
or load-bearing capacity, and shall be conducted in accordance
with the applicable design standard. If the structural assess-
ment determines that the load-bearing capacity is less than that
required by the code, load tests shall be conducted in accor-
dance with Section 1714.2. If the building, structure or portion
thereof is found to have inadequate stability or load-bearing
capacity for the expected loads, modifications to ensure struc-
tural adequacy or the removal of the inadequate construction
shall be required.
1714.2 Test standards. Structural components and assemblies
shall be tested in accordance with the appropriate material stan-
dards listed in Chapter 35. In the absence of a standard that con-
tains an applicable load test procedure, the test procedure shall
be developed by a registered design professional and approved.
The test procedure shall simulate loads and conditions of appli-
cation that the completed structure or portion thereof will be
subjected to in normal use.
1714.3 In-situ load tests. In-situ load tests shall be conducted
in accordance with Section 1714.3.1 or 1714.3.2 and shall be
supervised by a registered design professional. The test shall
simulate the applicable loading conditions specified in Chapter
16 as necessary to address the concerns regarding structural
stability of the building, structure or portion thereof.
1714.3.1 Load test procedure specified. Where a standard
listed in Chapter 35 contains an applicable load test proce-
dure and acceptance criteria, the test procedure and accep-
tance criteria in the standard shall apply. In the absence of
specific load factors or acceptance criteria, the load factors
and acceptance criteria in Section 1714.3.2 shall apply.

1714.3.2 Load test procedure not specified. In the absence
of applicable load test procedures contained within a stan-
dard referenced by this code or acceptance criteria for a spe-
cific material or method of construction, such existing
structure shall be subjected to a test procedure developed by
a registered design professional that simulates applicable
loading and deformation conditions. For components that
are not a part of the seismic-load-resisting system, the test
load shall be equal to two times the unfactored design loads.
The test load shall be left in place for a period of 24 hours.
The structure shall be considered to have successfully met
the test requirements where the following criteria are satis-
fied:
1. Under the design load, the deflection shall not exceed
the limitations specified in Section 1604.3.
2. Within 24 hours after removal of the test load, the
structure shall have recovered not less than 75 percent
of the maximum deflection.
3. During and immediately after the test, the structure
shall not show evidence of failure.

SECTION 1715
PRECONSTRUCTION LOAD TESTS

1715.1 General. In evaluating the physical properties of mate-
rials and methods of construction that are not capable of being
designed by approved engineering analysis or do not comply
with applicable material design standards listed in Chapter 35,
the structural adequacy shall be predetermined based on the
load test criteria established in this section.
1715.2 Load test procedures specified. Where specific load
test procedures, load factors and acceptance criteria are
included in the applicable design standards listed in Chapter
35, such test procedures, load factors and acceptance criteria
shall apply. In the absence of specific test procedures, load fac-
tors or acceptance criteria, the corresponding provisions in
Section 1715.3 shall apply.
1715.3 Load test procedures not specified. Where load test
procedures are not specified in the applicable design standards
listed in Chapter 35, the load-bearing and deformation capacity
of structural components and assemblies shall be determined
on the basis of a test procedure developed by a registered
design professional that simulates applicable loading and
deformation conditions. For components and assemblies that
are not a part of the seismic-force-resisting system, the test
shall be as specified in Section 1715.3.1. Load tests shall simu-
late the applicable loading conditions specified in Chapter 16.
1715.3.1 Test procedure. The test assembly shall be sub-
jected to an increasing superimposed load equal to not less
than two times the superimposed design load. The test load
shall be left in place for a period of 24 hours. The tested
assembly shall be considered to have successfully met the
test requirements if the assembly recovers not less than 75
percent of the maximum deflection within 24 hours after the
removal of the test load. The test assembly shall then be
reloaded and subjected to an increasing superimposed load
until either structural failure occurs or the superimposed
load is equal to two and one-half times the load at which the

384

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:03 AM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

deflection limitations specified in Section 1715.3.2 were
reached, or the load is equal to two and one-half times the
superimposed design load. In the case of structural compo-
nents and assemblies for which deflection limitations are
not specified in Section 1715.3.2, the test specimen shall be
subjected to an increasing superimposed load until struc-
tural failure occurs or the load is equal to two and one-half
times the desired superimposed design load. The allowable
superimposed design load shall be taken as the lesser of:
1. The load at the deflection limitation given in Section
1715.3.2.
2. The failure load divided by 2.5.
3. The maximum load applied divided by 2.5.
1715.3.2 Deflection. The deflection of structural members
under the design load shall not exceed the limitations in Sec-
tion 1604.3.
1715.4 Wall and partition assemblies. Load-bearing wall
and partition assemblies shall sustain the test load both with
and without window framing. The test load shall include all
design load components. Wall and partition assemblies shall be
tested both with and without door and window framing.
1715.5 Exterior window and door assemblies. The design
pressure rating of exterior windows and doors in buildings
shall be determined in accordance with Section 1715.5.1 or
1715.5.2.
Exception: Structural wind load design pressures for win-
dow units smaller than the size tested in accordance with
Section 1715.5.1 or 1715.5.2 shall be permitted to be higher
than the design value of the tested unit provided such higher
pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis.
All components of the small unit shall be the same as the
tested unit. Where such calculated design pressures are
used, they shall be validated by an additional test of the win-
dow unit having the highest allowable design pressure.
1715.5.1 Exterior windows and doors. Exterior windows
and sliding doors shall be tested and labeled as conforming
to AAMA/WDMA/CSA101/I.S.2/A440. The label shall
state the name of the manufacturer, the approved labeling
agency and the product designation as specified in AAMA/
WDMA/CSA101/I.S.2/A440. Exterior side-hinged doors
shall
be
tested
and
labeled
as
conforming
to
AAMA/WDMA/CSA101/I.S.2/A440 or comply with Sec-
tion 1715.5.2. Products tested and labeled as conforming to
AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 shall not be subject
to the requirements of Sections 2403.2 and 2403.3.
1715.5.2 Exterior windows and door assemblies not pro-
vided for in Section 1715.5.1. Exterior window and door
assemblies shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E 330.
Structural performance of garage doors shall be determined
in accordance with either ASTM E 330 or ANSI/DASMA
108,
and
shall meet
the
acceptance
criteria
of
ANSI/DASMA 108. Exterior window and door assemblies
containing glass shall comply with Section 2403. The
design pressure for testing shall be calculated in accordance
with Chapter 16. Each assembly shall be tested for 10 sec-
onds at a load equal to 1.5 times the design pressure.

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1715.6 Test specimens. Test specimens and construction shall
be representative of the materials, workmanship and details
normally used in practice. The properties of the materials used
to construct the test assembly shall be determined on the basis
of tests on samples taken from the load assembly or on repre-
sentative samples of the materials used to construct the load test
assembly. Required tests shall be conducted or witnessed by an
approved agency.

SECTION 1716
MATERIAL AND TEST STANDARDS
1716.1 Test standards for joist hangers and connectors.
1716.1.1 Test standards for joist hangers. The vertical
load-bearing capacity,
torsional moment capacity and
deflection characteristics of joist hangers shall be deter-
mined in accordance with ASTM D 1761 using lumber hav-
ing a specific gravity of 0.49 or greater, but not greater than
0.55, as determined in accordance with AF&PA NDS for
the joist and headers.
Exception: The joist length shall not be required to
exceed 24 inches (610 mm).
1716.1.2 Vertical load capacity for joist hangers. The ver-
tical load capacity for the joist hanger shall be determined
by testing a minimum of three joist hanger assemblies as
specified in ASTM D 1761. If the ultimate vertical load for
any one of the tests varies more than 20 percent from the
average ultimate vertical load, at least three additional tests
shall be conducted. The allowable vertical load of the joist
hanger shall be the lowest value determined from the fol-
lowing:
1. The lowest ultimate vertical load for a single hanger
from any test divided by three (where three tests are
conducted and each ultimate vertical load does not
vary more than 20 percent from the average ultimate
vertical load).
2. The average ultimate vertical load for a single hanger
from all tests divided by three (where six or more tests
are conducted).
3. The average from all tests of the vertical loads that
produce a vertical movement of the joist with respect
to the header of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).
4. The sum of the allowable design loads for nails or
other fasteners utilized to secure the joist hanger to the
wood members and allowable bearing loads that con-
tribute to the capacity of the hanger.
5. The allowable design load for the wood members
forming the connection.
1716.1.3 Torsional moment capacity for joist hangers.
The torsional moment capacity for the joist hanger shall be
determined by testing at least three joist hanger assemblies
as specified in ASTM D 1761. The allowable torsional
moment of the joist hanger shall be the average torsional
moment at which the lateral movement of the top or bottom
of the joist with respect to the original position of the joist is
1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

385

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:03 AM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL INSPECTIONS

1716.1.4 Design value modifications for joist hangers.
Allowable design values for joist hangers that are deter-
mined by Item 4 or 5 in Section 1716.1.2 shall be permitted
to be modified by the appropriate duration of loading factors
as specified in AF&PA NDS but shall not exceed the direct
loads as determined by Item 1, 2 or 3 in Section 1716.1.2.
Allowable design values determined by Item 1, 2 or 3 in
Section 1716.1.2 shall not be modified by duration of load-
ing factors.
1716.2 Concrete and clay roof tiles.
1716.2.1 Overturning resistance. Concrete and clay roof
tiles shall be tested to determine their resistance to overturn-
ing due to wind in accordance with SBCCI SSTD 11 and
Chapter 15.
1716.2.2 Wind tunnel testing. When roof tiles do not sat-
isfy the limitations in Chapter 16 for rigid tile, a wind tunnel
test shall be used to determine the wind characteristics of the
concrete or clay tile roof covering in accordance with
SBCCI SSTD 11 and Chapter 15.

386

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

17_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:15)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 9:56:03 AM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 18

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

This chapter has been revised in its entirety; there will be no marginal markings.

SECTION 1801
GENERAL

1801.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
building and foundation systems.
1801.2 Design basis. Allowable bearing pressures, allowable
stresses and design formulas provided in this chapter shall be
used with the allowable stress design load combinations speci-
fied in Section 1605.3. The quality and design of materials used
structurally in excavations and foundations shall comply with
the requirements specified in Chapters 16, 19, 21, 22 and 23 of
this code. Excavations and fills shall also comply with Chapter
33.

SECTION 1802
DEFINITIONS

1802.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
DEEP FOUNDATION. A deep foundation is a foundation
element that does not satisfy the definition of a shallow founda-
tion.
DRILLED SHAFT. A drilled shaft is a cast-in-place deep
foundation element constructed by drilling a hole (with or
without permanent casing) into soil or rock and filling it with
fluid concrete.
Socketed drilled shaft. A socketed drilled shaft is a drilled
shaft with a permanent pipe or tube casing that extends
down to bedrock and an uncased socket drilled into the bed-
rock.
HELICAL PILE. Manufactured steel deep foundation ele-
ment consisting of a central shaft and one or more helical bear-
ing plates. A helical pile is installed by rotating it into the
ground. Each helical bearing plate is formed into a screw thread
with a uniform defined pitch.
MICROPILE. A micropile is a bored, grouted-in-place deep
foundation element that develops its load-carrying capacity by
means of a bond zone in soil, bedrock or a combination of soil
and bedrock.
SHALLOW FOUNDATION. A shallow foundation is an
individual or strip footing, a mat foundation, a slab-on-grade
foundation or a similar foundation element.

SECTION 1803
GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS

1803.1 General. Geotechnical investigations shall be con-
ducted in accordance with Section 1803.2 and reported in
accordance with Section 1803.6. Where required by the build-

ing official or where geotechnical investigations involve in-situ
testing, laboratory testing or engineering calculations, such
investigations shall be conducted by a registered design profes-
sional.

1803.2 Investigations required. Geotechnical investigations
shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 1803.3 through
1803.5.
Exception: The building official shall be permitted to waive
the requirement for a geotechnical investigation where sat-
isfactory data from adjacent areas is available that demon-
strates an investigation is not necessary for any of the
conditions in Sections 1803.5.1 through 1803.5.6 and Sec-
tions 1803.5.10 and 1803.5.11.
1803.3 Basis of investigation. Soil classification shall be
based on observation and any necessary tests of the materials
disclosed by borings, test pits or other subsurface exploration
made in appropriate locations. Additional studies shall be
made as necessary to evaluate slope stability, soil strength,
position and adequacy of load-bearing soils, the effect of mois-
ture variation on soil-bearing capacity, compressibility, lique-
faction and expansiveness.
1803.3.1 Scope of
investigation. The scope of
the
geotechnical investigation including the number and types
of borings or soundings, the equipment used to drill or sam-
ple, the in-situ testing equipment and the laboratory testing
program shall be determined by a registered design profes-
sional.

1803.4 Qualified representative. The investigation procedure
and apparatus shall be in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practice. The registered design professional shall
have a fully qualified representative on site during all boring or
sampling operations.
1803.5 Investigated conditions. Geotechnical investigations
shall be conducted as indicated in Sections 1803.5.1 through
1803.5.12.
1803.5.1 Classification. Soil materials shall be classified in
accordance with ASTM D 2487.
1803.5.2 Questionable soil. Where the classification,
strength or compressibility of the soil is in doubt or where a
load-bearing value superior to that specified in this code is
claimed, the building official shall be permitted to require
that a geotechnical investigation be conducted.
1803.5.3 Expansive soil. In areas likely to have expansive
soil, the building official shall require soil tests to determine
where such soils do exist.
Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be
considered expansive, except that tests to show compliance

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

387

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:45 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the test pre-
scribed in Item 4 is conducted:
1. Plasticity index (PI) of 15 or greater, determined in
accordance with ASTM D 4318.
2. More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No.
200 sieve (75 mm), determined in accordance with
ASTM D 422.
3. More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less than
5 micrometers in size, determined in accordance with
ASTM D 422.
4. Expansion index greater than 20, determined in
accordance with ASTM D 4829.
1803.5.4 Ground-water table. A subsurface soil investiga-
tion shall be performed to determine whether the existing
ground-water table is above or within 5 feet (1524 mm)
below the elevation of the lowest floor level where such
floor is located below the finished ground level adjacent to
the foundation.

Exception: A subsurface soil investigation to determine
the location of the ground-water table shall not be
required where waterproofing is provided in accordance
with Section 1805.

1803.5.5 Deep foundations. Where deep foundations will
be used, a geotechnical investigation shall be conducted and
shall include all of the following, unless sufficient data upon
which to base the design and installation is otherwise avail-
able:
1. Recommended deep foundation types and installed
capacities.
2. Recommended center-to-center spacing of deep
foundation elements.
3. Driving criteria.
4. Installation procedures.
5. Field inspection and reporting procedures (to include
procedures for verification of the installed bearing
capacity where required).
6. Load test requirements.
7. Suitability of deep foundation materials for the
intended environment.
8. Designation of bearing stratum or strata.
9. Reductions for group action, where necessary.
1803.5.6 Rock strata. Where subsurface explorations at the
project site indicate variations or doubtful characteristics in
the structure of the rock upon which foundations are to be
constructed, a sufficient number of borings shall be made to
a depth of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) below the level of
the foundations to provide assurance of the soundness of the
foundation bed and its load-bearing capacity.

1803.5.7 Excavation near foundations. Where excavation
will remove lateral support from any foundation, an investi-
gation shall be conducted to assess the potential conse-
quences and address mitigation measures.

388

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:46 AM

2

1803.5.8 Compacted fill material. Where shallow founda-
tions will bear on compacted fill material more than 12
inches (305 mm) in depth, a geotechnical investigation shall
be conducted and shall include all of the following:
1. Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to
placement of compacted fill material.
2. Specifications for material to be used as compacted
fill.
3. Test methods to be used to determine the maximum
dry density and optimum moisture content of the
material to be used as compacted fill.
4. Maximum allowable thickness of each lift of com-
pacted fill material.
5. Field test method for determining the in-place dry
density of the compacted fill.
6. Minimum acceptable in-place dry density expressed
as a percentage of the maximum dry density deter-
mined in accordance with Item 3.
7. Number and frequency of field tests required to deter-
mine compliance with Item 6.
1803.5.9 Controlled low-strength material (CLSM).
Where shallow foundations will bear on controlled
low-strength material (CLSM), a geotechnical investigation
shall be conducted and shall include all of the following:
1. Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to
placement of the CLSM.
2. Specifications for the CLSM.
3. Laboratory or field test method(s) to be used to deter-
mine the compressive strength or bearing capacity of
the CLSM.
4. Test methods for determining the acceptance of the
CLSM in the field.
5. Number and frequency of field tests required to deter-
mine compliance with Item 4.
1803.5.10 Alternate setback and clearance. Where set-
backs or clearances other than those required in Section
1808.7 are desired, the building official shall be permitted to
require a geotechnical investigation by a registered design
professional to demonstrate that the intent of Section 1808.7
would be satisfied. Such an investigation shall include con-
sideration of material, height of slope, slope gradient, load
intensity and erosion characteristics of slope material.

1803.5.11 Seismic Design Categories C through F. For
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F
in accordance with Section 1613, a geotechnical investiga-
tion shall be conducted, and shall include an evaluation of
all of the following potential geologic and seismic hazards:
1. Slope instability.
2. Liquefaction.
3. Differential settlement.
4. Surface displacement due to faulting or lateral
spreading.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1803.5.12 Seismic Design Categories D through F. For
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F in
accordance with Section 1613, the geotechnical investiga-
tion required by Section 1803.5.11, shall also include:

1. The determination of lateral pressures on foundation
walls and retaining walls due to earthquake motions.
2. The potential for liquefaction and soil strength loss
evaluated for site peak ground accelerations, magni-
tudes and source characteristics consistent with the
design earthquake ground motions. Peak ground
acceleration shall be permitted to be determined
based on a site-specific study taking into account soil
amplification effects, as specified in Chapter 21 of
ASCE 7, or, in the absence of such a study, peak
ground accelerations shall be assumed equal to
SDS/2.5, where SDS is determined in accordance with
Section 1613.5.4.
3. An assessment of potential consequences of liquefac-
tion and soil strength loss, including estimation of dif-
ferential settlement, lateral movement, lateral loads
on foundations, reduction in foundation soil-bearing
capacity, increases in lateral pressures on retaining
walls and flotation of buried structures.
4. Discussion of mitigation measures such as, but not
limited to, ground stabilization, selection of appropri-
ate foundation type and depths, selection of appropri-
ate structural systems to accommodate anticipated
displacements and forces, or any combination of
these measures and how they shall be considered in
the design of the structure.
1803.6 Reporting. Where geotechnical investigations are
required, a written report of the investigations shall be submit-
ted to the building official by the owner or authorized agent at
the time of permit application. This geotechnical report shall
include, but need not be limited to, the following information:

1. A plot showing the location of the soil investigations.
2. A complete record of the soil boring and penetration
test logs and soil samples.
3. A record of the soil profile.
4. Elevation of the water table, if encountered.
5. Recommendations for foundation type and design cri-
teria, including but not limited to: bearing capacity of
natural or compacted soil; provisions to mitigate the
effects of expansive soils; mitigation of the effects of
liquefaction, differential settlement and varying soil
strength; and the effects of adjacent loads.
6. Expected total and differential settlement.
7. Deep foundation information in accordance with Sec-
tion 1803.5.5.
8. Special design and construction provisions for founda-
tions of structures founded on expansive soils, as nec-
essary.
9. Compacted fill material properties and testing in accor-
dance with Section 1803.5.8.

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

10. Controlled low-strength material properties and testing
in accordance with Section 1803.5.9.

SECTION 1804
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL
1804.1 Excavation near foundations. Excavation for any pur-
pose shall not remove lateral support from any foundation
without first underpinning or protecting the foundation against
settlement or lateral translation.
1804.2 Placement of backfill. The excavation outside the
foundation shall be backfilled with soil that is free of organic
material, construction debris, cobbles and boulders or with a
controlled low-strength material (CLSM). The backfill shall be
placed in lifts and compacted in a manner that does not damage
the foundation or the waterproofing or dampproofing material.
Exception: CLSM need not be compacted.
1804.3 Site grading. The ground immediately adjacent to the
foundation shall be sloped away from the building at a slope of
not less than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent
slope) for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) measured
perpendicular to the face of the wall. If physical obstructions or
lot lines prohibit 10 feet (3048 mm) of horizontal distance, a
5-percent slope shall be provided to an approved alternative
method of diverting water away from the foundation. Swales
used for this purpose shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent
where located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foun-
dation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the
building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent
away from the building.
Exception: Where climatic or soil conditions warrant, the
slope of the ground away from the building foundation shall
be permitted to be reduced to not less than one unit vertical
in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).
The procedure used to establish the final ground level adja-
cent to the foundation shall account for additional settlement of
the backfill.
1804.4 Grading and fill in flood hazard areas. In flood haz-
ard areas established in Section 1612.3, grading and/or fill
shall not be approved:
1. Unless such fill is placed, compacted and sloped to mini-
mize shifting, slumping and erosion during the rise and
fall of flood water and, as applicable, wave action.
2. In floodways, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a regis-
tered design professional in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed grading or fill, or
both, will not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the design flood.
3. In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action, unless such fill is conducted and/or placed to
avoid diversion of water and waves toward any building
or structure.
4. Whe re de s ign f lood e leva t ion s a re spec i f ied bu t
floodways have not been designated, unless it has been
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

389

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:46 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

flood hazard area encroachment, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area
encroachment, will not increase the design flood eleva-
tion more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point.
1804.5 Compacted fill material. Where shallow foundations
will bear on compacted fill material, the compacted fill shall
comply with the provisions of an approved geotechnical report,
as set forth in Section 1803.
Exception: Compacted fill material 12 inches (305 mm) in
depth or less need not comply with an approved report, pro-
vided the in-place dry density is not less than 90 percent of
the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content
determined in accordance with ASTM D 1557. The com-
paction shall be verified by special inspection in accordance
with Section 1704.7.
1804.6 Controlled low-strength material (CLSM). Where
shallow foundations will bear on controlled low-strength mate-
rial (CLSM), the CLSM shall comply with the provisions of an
approved geotechnical report, as set forth in Section 1803.

SECTION 1805
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING

1805.1 General. Walls or portions thereof that retain earth and
enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be water-
proofed and dampproofed in accordance with this section, with
the exception of those spaces containing groups other than resi-
dential and institutional where such omission is not detrimental
to the building or occupancy.

Ventilation for crawl spaces shall comply with Section
1203.4.
1805.1.1 Story above grade plane. Where a basement is
considered a story above grade plane and the finished
ground level adjacent to the basement wall is below the
basement floor elevation for 25 percent or more of the per-
imeter, the floor and walls shall be dampproofed in accor-
dance with Section 1805.2 and a foundation drain shall be
installed in accordance with Section 1805.4.2. The founda-
tion drain shall be installed around the portion of the perim-
eter where the basement floor is below ground level. The
provisions of Sections 1803.5.4, 1805.3 and 1805.4.1 shall
not apply in this case.
1805.1.2 Under-floor space. The finished ground level of
an under-floor space such as a crawl space shall not be
located below the bottom of the footings. Where there is evi-
dence that the ground-water table rises to within 6 inches
(152 mm) of the ground level at the outside building perime-
ter, or that the surface water does not readily drain from the
building site, the ground level of the under-floor space shall
be as high as the outside finished ground level, unless an
approved drainage system is provided. The provisions of
Sections 1803.5.4, 1805.2, 1805.3 and 1805.4 shall not
apply in this case.
1805.1.2.1 Flood hazard areas. For buildings and struc-
tures in flood hazard areas as established in Section
1612.3, the finished ground level of an under-floor space

such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the
outside finished ground level on at least one side.
Exception: Under-floor spaces of Group R-3 build-
ings that meet the requirements of FEMA/FIA-TB-11.
1805.1.3 Ground-water control. Where the ground-water
table is lowered and maintained at an elevation not less than
6 inches (152 mm) below the bottom of the lowest floor, the
floor and walls shall be dampproofed in accordance with
Section 1805.2. The design of the system to lower the
ground-water table shall be based on accepted principles of
engineering that shall consider, but not necessarily be lim-
ited to, permeability of the soil, rate at which water enters
the drainage system, rated capacity of pumps, head against
which pumps are to operate and the rated capacity of the dis-
posal area of the system.
1805.2 Dampproofing. Where hydrostatic pressure will not
occur as determined by Section 1803.5.4, floors and walls for
other than wood foundation systems shall be dampproofed in
accordance with this section. Wood foundation systems shall
be constructed in accordance with AF&PA PWF.
1805.2.1 Floors. Dampproofing materials for floors shall
be installed between the floor and the base course required
by Section 1805.4.1, except where a separate floor is pro-
vided above a concrete slab.
Where installed beneath the slab, dampproofing shall
consist of not less than 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) poly-
ethylene with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm),
or other approved methods or materials. Where permitted to
be installed on top of the slab, dampproofing shall consist of
mopped-on bitumen, not less than 4-mil (0.004 inch; 0.102
mm) polyethylene, or other approved methods or materials.
Joints in the membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accor-
dance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
1805.2.2 Walls. Dampproofing materials for walls shall be
installed on the exterior surface of the wall, and shall extend
from the top of the footing to above ground level.
Dampproofing shall consist of a bituminous material, 3
pounds per square yard (16 N/m2) of acrylic modified
cement, 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) coat of surface-bonding mortar
complying with ASTM C 887, any of the materials permit-
ted for waterproofing by Section 1805.3.2 or other
approved methods or materials.
1805.2.2.1 Surface preparation of walls. Prior to appli-
cation of dampproofing materials on concrete walls,
holes and recesses resulting from the removal of form
ties shall be sealed with a bituminous material or other
approved methods or materials. Unit masonry walls shall
be parged on the exterior surface below ground level with
not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of portland cement mortar.
The parging shall be coved at the footing.
Exception: Parging of unit masonry walls is not
required where a material is approved for direct appli-
cation to the masonry.
1805.3 Waterproofing. Where the ground-water investigation
required by Section 1803.5.4 indicates that a hydrostatic pres-
sure condition exists, and the design does not include a

390

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:47 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ground-water control system as described in Section 1805.1.3,
walls and floors shall be waterproofed in accordance with this
section.
1805.3.1 Floors. Floors required to be waterproofed shall
be of concrete and designed and constructed to withstand
the hydrostatic pressures to which the floors will be sub-
jected.
Waterproofing shall be accomplished by placing a mem-
brane of rubberized asphalt, butyl rubber, fully adhered/fully
bonded HDPE or polyolefin composite membrane or not less
than 6-mil [0.006 inch (0.152 mm)] polyvinyl chloride with
joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) or other
approved materials under the slab. Joints in the membrane
shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1805.3.2 Walls. Walls required to be waterproofed shall be
of concrete or masonry and shall be designed and con-
structed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and other lat-
eral loads to which the walls will be subjected.
Waterproofing shall be applied from the bottom of the
wall to not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the maxi-
mum elevation of the ground-water table. The remainder of
the wall shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section
1805.2.2. Waterproofing
shall
consist
of
two-ply
hot-mopped felts, not less than 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152
mm) polyvinyl chloride, 40-mil (0.040 inch; 1.02 mm)
polymer-modified asphalt, 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm)
polyethylene or other approved methods or materials capa-
ble of bridging nonstructural cracks. Joints in the membrane
shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s installation instructions.
1805.3.2.1 Surface preparation of walls. Prior to the
application of waterproofing materials on concrete or
masonry walls, the walls shall be prepared in accordance
with Section 1805.2.2.1.
1805.3.3 Joints and penetrations. Joints in walls and
floors, joints between the wall and floor and penetrations of
the wall and floor shall be made water-tight utilizing
approved methods and materials.
1805.4 Subsoil drainage system. Where a hydrostatic pres-
sure condition does not exist, dampproofing shall be provided
and a base shall be installed under the floor and a drain installed
around the foundation perimeter. A subsoil drainage system
designed and constructed in accordance with Section 1805.1.3
shall be deemed adequate for lowering the ground-water table.
1805.4.1 Floor base course. Floors of basements, except as
provided for in Section 1805.1.1, shall be placed over a floor
base course not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness that
consists of gravel or crushed stone containing not more than
10 percent of material that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm)
sieve.
Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel
or sand/gravel mixture soils, a floor base course is not
required.

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

1805.4.2 Foundation drain. A drain shall be placed around
the perimeter of a foundation that consists of gravel or
crushed stone containing not more than 10-percent material
that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. The drain shall
extend a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the out-
side edge of the footing. The thickness shall be such that the
bottom of the drain is not higher than the bottom of the base
under the floor, and that the top of the drain is not less than 6
inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing. The top of the
drain shall be covered with an approved filter membrane
material. Where a drain tile or perforated pipe is used, the
invert of the pipe or tile shall not be higher than the floor ele-
vation. The top of joints or the top of perforations shall be
protected with an approved filter membrane material. The
pipe or tile shall be placed on not less than 2 inches (51 mm)
of gravel or crushed stone complying with Section
1805.4.1, and shall be covered with not less than 6 inches
(152 mm) of the same material.
1805.4.3 Drainage discharge. The floor base and founda-
tion perimeter drain shall discharge by gravity or mechani-
cal means into an approved drainage system that complies
with the International Plumbing Code.
Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel
or sand/gravel mixture soils, a dedicated drainage system
is not required.

SECTION 1806
PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF SOILS

1806.1 Load combinations. The presumptive load-bearing
values provided in Table 1806.2 shall be used with the allow-
able stress design load combinations specified in Section
1605.3. The values of vertical foundation pressure and lateral
bearing pressure given in Table 1806.2 shall be permitted to be
increased by one-third where used with the alternative basic
load combinations of Section 1605.3.2 that include wind or
earthquake loads.
1806.2 Presumptive load-bearing values. The load-bearing
values used in design for supporting soils near the surface shall
not exceed the values specified in Table 1806.2 unless data to
substantiate the use of higher values are submitted and
approved. Where the building official has reason to doubt the
classification, strength or compressibility of the soil, the
requirements of Section 1803.5.2 shall be satisfied.
Presumptive load-bearing values shall apply to materials
with similar physical characteristics and dispositions. Mud,
organic silt, organic clays, peat or unprepared fill shall not be
assumed to have a presumptive load-bearing capacity unless
data to substantiate the use of such a value are submitted.
Exception: A presumptive load-bearing capacity shall be
permitted to be used where the building official deems the
load-bearing capacity of mud, organic silt or unprepared fill
is adequate for the support of lightweight or temporary
structures.
1806.3 Lateral load resistance. Where the presumptive val-
ues of Table 1806.2 are used to determine resistance to lateral

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

391

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:47 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

loads, the calculations shall be in accordance with Sections
1806.3.1 through 1806.3.4.

1806.3.1 Combined resistance. The total resistance to lat-
eral loads shall be permitted to be determined by combining
the values derived from the lateral bearing pressure and the
lateral sliding resistance specified in Table 1806.2.

1806.3.2 Lateral sliding resistance limit. For clay, sandy
clay, silty clay, clayey silt, silt and sandy silt, in no case shall
the lateral sliding resistance exceed one-half the dead load.

1806.3.3 Increase for depth. The lateral bearing pressures
specified in Table 1806.2 shall be permitted to be increased
by the tabular value for each additional foot (305 mm) of
depth to a maximum of 15 times the tabular value.

1806.3.4 Increase for poles. Isolated poles for uses such as
flagpoles or signs and poles used to support buildings that
are not adversely affected by a 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) motion at
the ground surface due to short-term lateral loads shall be
permitted to be designed using lateral bearing pressures
equal to two times the tabular values.

SECTION 1807
FOUNDATION WALLS, RETAINING WALLS AND
EMBEDDED POSTS AND POLES

1807.1 Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with Sections 1807.1.1 through
1807.1.6. Foundation walls shall be supported by foundations
designed in accordance with Section 1808.

1807.1.1 Design lateral soil loads. Foundation walls shall
be designed for the lateral soil loads set forth in Section
1610.
1807.1.2 Unbalanced backfill height. Unbalanced backfill
height is the difference in height between the exterior finish
ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing
that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish
ground level. Where an interior concrete slab on grade is
provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the
foundation wall, the unbalanced backfill height shall be per-
mitted to be measured from the exterior finish ground level
to the top of the interior concrete slab.
1807.1.3 Rubble stone foundation walls. Foundation
walls of rough or random rubble stone shall not be less than
16 inches (406 mm) thick. Rubble stone shall not be used for
foundation walls of structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category C, D, E or F.
1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems. Perma-
nent wood foundation systems shall be designed and
installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF. Lumber and ply-
wood shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Com-
modity Specification A, Use Category 4B and Section 5.2)
and shall be identified in accordance with Section
2303.1.8.1.
1807.1.5 Concrete and masonry foundation walls. Con-
crete and masonry foundation walls shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 19 or 21, as applicable.
Exception: Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall
be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance
with Section 1807.1.6.

TABLE 1806.2
PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES

CLASS OF MATERIALS

VERTICAL FOUNDATION
PRESSURE (psf)

LATERAL BEARING
PRESSURE
(psf/f below natural grade)

LATERAL SLIDING RESISTANCE

Coefficient of frictiona

Cohesion (psf)b

1. Crystalline bedrock

12,000

1,200

2. Sedimentary and foli-
ated rock

3. Sandy gravel and/or
gravel (GW and GP)

4. Sand, silty sand, clayey
sand, silty gravel and
clayey gravel (SW, SP,
SM, SC, GM and GC)

5. Clay, sandy clay, silty
clay, clayey silt, silt and
sandy silt (CL, ML,
MH and CH)

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,500

400

200

150

100

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.
a. Coefficient to be multiplied by the dead load.
b. Cohesion value to be multiplied by the contact area, as limited by Section 1806.3.2.

0.70

0.35

0.35

0.25

—

—

—

—

—

130

392

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:48 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry
foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls
that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be
permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance
with this section.
1807.1.6.1 Foundation wall thickness. The thickness
of prescriptively designed foundation walls shall not be
less than the thickness of the wall supported, except that
foundation walls of at least 8-inch (203 mm) nominal
width shall be permitted to support brick-veneered frame
walls and 10-inch-wide (254 mm) cavity walls provided
the requirements of Section 1807.1.6.2 or 1807.1.6.3 are
met.

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

1807.1.6.2 Concrete foundation walls. Concrete foun-
dation walls shall comply with the following:
1. The thickness shall comply with the requirements
of Table 1807.1.6.2.
2. The size and spacing of vertical reinforcement
shown in Table 1807.1.6.2 is based on the use of
reinforcement with a minimum yield strength of
60,000 pounds per square inch (psi) (414 MPa).
Vertical reinforcement with a minimum yield
strength of 40,000 psi (276 MPa) or 50,000 psi
(345 MPa) shall be permitted, provided the same
size bar is used and the spacing shown in the table
is reduced by multiplying the spacing by 0.67 or
0.83, respectively.

TABLE 1807.1.6.2
CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALLSb, c

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)
45d

Minimum wall thickness (inches)

MAXIMUM
WALL
HEIGHT
(feet)

MAXIMUM
UNBALANCED
BACKFILL
HEIGHTe (feet)

5

6

7

8

9

10

4
5

4
5
6

4
5
6
7

4
5
6
7
8

4
5
6
7
8
9d

4
5
6
7
8
9d
10d

7.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
#5 at 47

PC
PC
PC
PC
#5 at 41
#6 at 46

PC
PC
PC
PC
#5 at 38
#6 at 41
#7 at 45

30d

9.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
#4 at 48
#6 at 45

11.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

7.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
#5 at 46

PC
PC
PC
#5 at 41
#6 at 43

PC
PC
PC
#5 at 37
#6 at 38
#7 at 41

PC
PC
PC
#6 at 48
#7 at 47
#7 at 37
#7 at 31

9.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
#5 at 37
#6 at 41

PC
PC
PC
PC
#6 at 47
#7 at 48
#7 at 40

11.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC
#4 at 48
#6 at 38

7.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
#5 at 48
#6 at 48

PC
PC
#5 at 43
#6 at 43
#6 at 32

PC
PC
#5 at 39
#6 at 38
#7 at 39
#7 at 31

PC
PC
#5 at 37
#6 at 35
#7 at 35
#6 at 22
#6 at 22

60

9.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
#6 at 44

PC
PC
PC
#5 at 37
#6 at 39
#7 at 41

PC
PC
PC
#6 at 48
#7 at 47
#7 at 37
#7 at 30

11.5

PC
PC

PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
PC

PC
PC
PC
PC
#4 at 48
#6 at 39

PC
PC
PC
PC
#6 at 45
#7 at 47
#7 at 38

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.
a. For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.
b. Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.2.
c. “PC” means plain concrete.
d. Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are
not applicable (see Section 1610).
e. For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

393

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:48 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

3. Vertical reinforcement, when required, shall be
placed nearest the inside face of the wall a dis-
tance, d, from the outside face (soil face) of the
wall. The distance, d, is equal to the wall thickness,
t, minus 1.25 inches (32 mm) plus one-half the bar
diameter, db, [ d = t – (1.25 + db / 2) ]. The reinforce-
ment shall be placed within a tolerance of ± 3/8 inch
(9.5 mm) where d is less than or equal to 8 inches
(203 mm) or ± 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) where d is greater
than 8 inches (203 mm).
4. In lieu of the reinforcement shown in Table
1807.1.6.2, smaller reinforcing bar sizes with
c lo s e r s p a c in g s th a t p r o v id e a n e q u iv a l en t
cross-sectional area of reinforcement per unit
length shall be permitted.
5. Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from
the inside face of the wall shall not be less than 3/4
inch (19.1 mm). Concrete cover for reinforcement
measured from the outside face of the wall shall
not be less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars
and smaller, and not less than 2 inches (51 mm) for
larger bars.
6. Concrete shall have a specified compressive
strength, f ¢c, of not less than 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa).
7. The unfactored axial load per linear foot of wall
shall not exceed 1.2 t f ¢c where t is the specified
wall thickness in inches.

1807.1.6.2.1 Seismic requirements. Based on the
seismic design category assigned to the structure in
accordance with Section 1613, concrete foundation
walls designed using Table 1807.1.6.2 shall be sub-
ject to the following limitations:
1. Seismic Design Categories A and B. No addi-
tional seismic requirements, except provide
reinforcement around openings in accordance
with Section 1909.6.3.
2. Seismic Design Categories C, D, E and F.
Tables shall not be used except as allowed for
plain concrete members in Section 1908.1.8.
1807.1.6.3 Masonry foundation walls. Masonry foun-
dation walls shall comply with the following:
1. The thickness shall comply with the require-
ments of Table 1807.1.6.3(1) for plain masonry
walls or Table 1807.1.6.3(2), 1807.1.6.3(3) or
1807.1.6.3(4) for masonry walls with reinforce-
ment.
2. Vertical reinforcement shall have a minimum
yield strength of 60,000 psi (414 MPa).
3. The specified location of the reinforcement shall
equal or exceed the effective depth distance, d,
noted in Tables 1807.1.6.3(2), 1807.1.6.3(3) and
1807.1.6.3(4) and shall be measured from the
face of the exterior (soil) side of the wall to the

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(1)
PLAIN MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLSa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet)

MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTe(feet)

7

8

9

4 (or less)
5
6
7

4 (or less)
5
6
7
8

4 (or less)
5
6
7
8
9f

MINIMUM NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (inches)

Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)

30f

8
8
10
12

8
8
10
12
10 (solidc)

8
8
12
12 (solidc)
12 (solidc)
Note d

45f

8
10
12
10 (solidc)

8
10
12
12 (solidc)
12 (solidc)

8
10
12
12 (solidc)
Note d
Note d

60

8
10
10 (solidc)
10 (solidc)

8
12
12 (solidc)
Note d
Note d

8
12
12 (solidc)
Note d
Note d
Note d

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.
a. For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.
b. Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.
c. Solid grouted hollow units or solid masonry units.
d. A design in compliance with Chapter 21 or reinforcement in accordance with Table 1807.1.6.3(2) is required.
e. For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.
f. Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are
not applicable (see Section 1610).

394

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:49 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

center of the vertical reinforcement. The rein-
forcement shall be placed within the tolerances
specified in TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6, Arti-
cle 3.3.B.8 of the specified location.

4. Grout shall comply with Section 2103.12.

5. Concre te masonry un its sha ll comp ly w ith
ASTM C 90.

6. Clay masonry units shall comply with ASTM C
652 for hollow brick, except compliance with
ASTM C 62 or ASTM C 216 shall be permitted
where solid masonry units are installed in accor-
d a n c e w i th T a b l e 1 8 0 7 . 1 . 6 . 3 ( 1 ) f o r p l a in
masonry.

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

7. Masonry units shall be laid in running bond and
installed with Type M or S mortar in accordance
with Section 2103.8.
8. The unfactored axial load per linear foot of wall
shall not exceed 1.2 t f¢ m where t is the specified
wall thickness in inches and f ¢m is the specified
compressive strength of masonry in pounds per
square inch.
9. At least 4 inches (102 mm) of solid masonry shall
be provided at girder supports at the top of hol-
low masonry unit foundation walls.
10. Corbeling of masonry shall be in accordance
with Section 2104.2. Where an 8-inch (203 mm)
wall is corbeled, the top corbel shall not extend

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(2)
8-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ³ 5 INCHESa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)

MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)

7-4

8-0

8-8

9-4

10-0

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-4

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-8e

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-4e

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-0e
10-0e

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)

Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)

30e

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#5 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#7 at 48

45e

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#6 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#8 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#8 at 48
#9 at 48

60

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#7 at 48

#4 at 48
#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#7 at 48
#7 at 48

#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#8 at 48

#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#8 at 48
#9 at 48

#4 at 48
#5 at 48
#6 at 48
#7 at 48
#8 at 48
#9 at 48
#9 at 48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.
a. For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.
b. Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.
c. For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.
d. For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.
e. Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are
not applicable. See Section 1610.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

395

18_ibc_2009pg395.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:38:47 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

higher than the bottom of the floor framing and
shall be a full course of headers at least 6 inches
(152 mm) in length or the top course bed joint
shall be tied to the vertical wall projection. The
tie shall be W2.8 (4.8 mm) and spaced at a maxi-
mum horizontal distance of 36 inches (914 mm).
The hollow space behind the corbelled masonry
shall be filled with mortar or grout.
1807.1.6.3.1 Alternative foundation wall rein-
forcement. In lieu of the reinforcement provisions for
masonry foundation walls in Table 1807.1.6.3(2),
1807.1.6.3(3) or 1807.1.6.3(4), alternative reinforc-
ing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent
cross-sectional area of reinforcement per linear foot

(mm) of wall shall be permitted to be used, provided
the spacing of reinforcement does not exceed 72
inches (1829 mm) and reinforcing bar sizes do not
exceed No. 11.
1807.1.6.3.2 Seismic requirements. Based on the
seismic design category assigned to the structure in
accordance with Section 1613, masonry foundation
walls designed using Tables 1807.1.6.3(1) through
1807.1.6.3(4) shall be subject to the following limita-
tions:
1. Seismic Design Categories A and B. No addi-
tional seismic requirements.
2. Seismic Design Category C. A design using
Tables 1807.1.6.3(1) through 1807.1.6.3(4) is

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(3)
10-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ³ 6.75 INCHES a, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)

MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)

7-4

8-0

8-8

9-4

10-0

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-4

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-8e

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-4e

4-0 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-0e
10-0e

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)

Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)

30e

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#7 at 56

45e

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 5
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#7 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#7 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#7 at 56
#7 at 56
#8 at 56

60

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#7 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#8 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#6 at 56
#7 at 56
#7 at 56

#4 at 56
#4 at 56
#5 at 56
#7 at 56
#8 at 56
#9 at 56
#9 at 56

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 1.157 kPa/m.
a. For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.
b. Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.
c. For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.
d. For height of unbalanced backfill, See Section 1807.1.2.
e. Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are
not applicable. See Section 1610.

396

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:50 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

subject to the seismic requirements of Section
1.17.4.3 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.
3. Seismic Design Category D. A design using
Tables 1807.1.6.3(2) through 1807.1.6.3(4) is
subject to the seismic requirements of Section
1.17.4.4 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.
4. Seismic Design Categories E and F. A design
u s i n g T a b l e s 1 8 0 7 . 1 . 6 . 3 ( 2 )
t h r o u g h
1807.1.6.3(4) is subject to the seismic require-
ments of Section 1.17.4.5 of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
1807.2 Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed in
accordance with Sections 1807.2.1 through 1807.2.3.
1807.2.1 General. Retaining walls shall be designed to
ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive foun-

dation pressure and water uplift. Where a keyway is
extended below the wall base with the intent to engage pas-
sive pressure and enhance sliding stability, lateral soil pres-
sures on both sides of the keyway shall be considered in the
sliding analysis.
1807.2.2 Design lateral soil loads. Retaining walls shall be
designed for the lateral soil loads set forth in Section 1610.
1807.2.3 Safety factor. Retaining walls shall be designed to
resist the lateral action of soil to produce sliding and over-
turning with a minimum safety factor of 1.5 in each case.
The load combinations of Section 1605 shall not apply to
this requirement. Instead, design shall be based on 0.7 times
nominal earthquake loads, 1.0 times other nominal loads,
and investigation with one or more of the variable loads set
to zero. The safety factor against lateral sliding shall be
taken as the available soil resistance at the base of the retain-

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(4)
12-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ³ 8.75 INCHESa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)

MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)

7-4

8-0

8-8

9-4

10-0

4 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-4

4 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0

4 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-8e

4 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-4e

4 (or less)
5-0
6-0
7-0
8-0
9-0e
10-0e

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)

Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)

30e

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#7 at 72

45e

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#7 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#7 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#6 at 72
#7 at 72
#8 at 72

60

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#8 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#8 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#7 at 72
#8 at 72

#4 at 72
#4 at 72
#5 at 72
#6 at 72
#7 at 72
#8 at 72
#9 at 72

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.
a. For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.
b. Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.
c. For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.
d. For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.
e. Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are
not applicable. See Section 1610.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

397

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:51 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

ing wall foundation divided by the net lateral force applied
to the retaining wall.

resist lateral loads where lateral constraint is provided at
the ground surface, such as by a rigid floor or pavement.

Exception: Where earthquake loads are included, the
minimum safety factor for retaining wall sliding and
overturning shall be 1.1.

1807.3 Embedded posts and poles. Designs to resist both
axial and lateral loads employing posts or poles as columns
embedded in earth or in concrete footings in earth shall be in
accordance with Sections 1807.3.1 through 1807.3.3.

1807.3.1 Limitations. The design procedures outlined in
this section are subject to the following limitations:
1. The frictional resistance for structural walls and slabs
on silts and clays shall be limited to one-half of the
normal force imposed on the soil by the weight of the
footing or slab.
2. Posts embedded in earth shall not be used to provide
lateral support for structural or nonstructural materi-
als such as plaster, masonry or concrete unless brac-
ing is provided that develops the limited deflection
required.
Wood poles shall be treated in accordance with AWPA
U1 for sawn timber posts (Commodity Specification A, Use
Category 4B) and for round timber posts (Commodity
Specification B, Use Category 4B).

1807.3.2 Design criteria. The depth to resist lateral loads
shall be determined using the design criteria established in
Sections 1807.3.2.1 through 1807.3.2.3, or by other meth-
ods approved by the building official.

1807.3.2.1 Nonconstrained. The following formula
shall be used in determining the depth of embedment
required to resist lateral loads where no lateral constraint
is provided at the ground surface, such as by a rigid floor
or rigid ground surface pavement, and where no lateral
constraint is provided above the ground surface, such as
by a structural diaphragm.

d = 0.5A{1 + [1 + (4.36h/A)]1/2}

(Equation 18-1)

where:
A = 2.34P/S1 b.
b = Diameter of round post or footing or diagonal
dimension of square post or footing, feet (m).
d = Depth of embedment in earth in feet (m) but not
over 12 feet (3658 mm) for purpose of comput-
ing lateral pressure.
h = Distance in feet (m) from ground surface to point
of application of “P.”
P = Applied lateral force in pounds (kN).
S1 = Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set
forth in Section 1806.2 based on a depth of
one-third the depth of embedment in pounds per
square foot (psf) (kPa).
1807.3.2.2 Constrained. The following formula shall be
used to determine the depth of embedment required to

d

=

4 25
.
Ph
S b

3

or alternatively

d

=

g

4 25
.
M
S b

3

(Equation 18-2)

(Equation 18-3)

where:
Mg = Moment in the post at grade, in foot-pounds
(kN-m).
S3 = Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set
forth in Section 1806.2 based on a depth equal to
the depth of embedment in pounds per square
foot (kPa).
1807.3.2.3 Vertical load. The resistance to vertical loads
shall be determined using the vertical foundation pres-
sure set forth in Table 1806.2.
1807.3.3 Backfill. The backfill in the annular space around
columns not embedded in poured footings shall be by one of
the following methods:
1. Backfill shall be of concrete with a specified com-
pressive strength of not less than 2,000 psi (13.8
MPa). The hole shall not be less than 4 inches (102
mm) larger than the diameter of the column at its bot-
tom or 4 inches (102 mm) larger than the diagonal
dimension of a square or rectangular column.
2. Backfill shall be of clean sand. The sand shall be thor-
oughly compacted by tamping in layers not more than
8 inches (203 mm) in depth.
3. Backfill shall be of controlled low-strength material
(CLSM).

SECTION 1808
FOUNDATIONS

1808.1 General. Foundations shall be designed and con-
structed in accordance with Sections 1808.2 through 1808.9.
Shallow foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of Sec-
tion 1809. Deep foundations shall also satisfy the requirements
of Section 1810.
1808.2 Design for capacity and settlement. Foundations
shall be so designed that the allowable bearing capacity of the
soil is not exceeded, and that differential settlement is mini-
mized. Foundations in areas with expansive soils shall be
designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1808.6.
1808.3 Design loads. Foundations shall be designed for the
most unfavorable effects due to the combinations of loads spec-
ified in Section 1605.2 or 1605.3. The dead load is permitted to
include the weight of foundations and overlying fill. Reduced
live loads, as specified in Sections 1607.9 and 1607.11, shall be
permitted to be used in the design of foundations.

398

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:51 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1808.3.1 Seismic overturning. Where foundations are pro-
portioned using the load combinations of Section 1605.2 or
1605.3.1, and the computation of seismic overturning
effects is by equivalent lateral force analysis or modal anal-
ysis, the proportioning shall be in accordance with Section
12.13.4 of ASCE 7.
1808.4 Vibratory loads. Where machinery operations or other
vibrations are transmitted through the foundation, consider-
ation shall be given in the foundation design to prevent detri-
mental disturbances of the soil.
1808.5 Shifting or moving soils. Where it is known that the
shallow subsoils are of a shifting or moving character, founda-
tions shall be carried to a sufficient depth to ensure stability.
1808.6 Design for expansive soils. Foundations for buildings
and structures founded on expansive soils shall be designed in
accordance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2.
Exception: Foundation design need not comply with Sec-
tion 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2 where one of the following condi-
tions is satisfied:
1. The soil is removed in accordance with Section
1808.6.3; or
2. The building official approves stabilization of the soil
in accordance with Section 1808.6.4.
1808.6.1 Foundations. Foundations placed on or within the
active zone of expansive soils shall be designed to resist dif-
ferential volume changes and to prevent structural damage
to the supported structure. Deflection and racking of the
supported structure shall be limited to that which will not
interfere with the usability and serviceability of the struc-
ture.
Foundations placed below where volume change occurs
or below expansive soil shall comply with the following
provisions:
1. Foundations extending into or penetrating expansive
soils shall be designed to prevent uplift of the sup-
ported structure.
2. Foundations penetrating expansive soils shall be
designed to resist forces exerted on the foundation
due to soil volume changes or shall be isolated from
the expansive soil.
1808.6.2 Slab-on-ground foundations. Moments, shears
and deflections for use in designing slab-on-ground, mat or
raft foundations on expansive soils shall be determined in
accordance with WRI/CRSI Design of Slab-on-Ground
Foundations or PTI Standard Requirements for Analysis of
Shallow Concrete Foundations on Expansive Soils. Using
the moments, shears and deflections determined above,
nonprestressed slabs-on-ground, mat or raft foundations on
expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with
WRI/CRSI Design of Slab-on-Ground Foundations and
post-tensioned slab-on-ground, mat or raft foundations on
expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with PTI
Standard
Requirements
for Design
of
Shallow
Post-Tensioned Concrete Foundations on Expansive Soils.
It shall be permitted to analyze and design such slabs by
other methods that account for soil-structure interaction, the

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

deformed shape of the soil support, the plate or stiffened
plate action of the slab as well as both center lift and edge lift
conditions. Such alternative methods shall be rational and
the basis for all aspects and parameters of the method shall
be available for peer review.

1808.6.3 Removal of expansive soil. Where expansive soil
is removed in lieu of designing foundations in accordance
with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2, the soil shall be removed
to a depth sufficient to ensure a constant moisture content in
the remaining soil. Fill material shall not contain expansive
soils and shall comply with Section 1804.5 or 1804.6.

Exception: Expansive soil need not be removed to the
depth of constant moisture, provided the confining pres-
sure in the expansive soil created by the fill and sup-
ported structure exceeds the swell pressure.

1808.6.4 Stabilization. Where the active zone of expansive
soils is stabilized in lieu of designing foundations in accor-
dance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2, the soil shall be
stabilized by chemical, dewatering, presaturation or equiva-
lent techniques.

1808.7 Foundations on or adjacent to slopes. The placement
of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than
one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3-percent slope)
shall comply with Sections 1808.7.1 through 1808.7.5.

1808.7.1 Building clearance from ascending slopes. In
general, buildings below slopes shall be set a sufficient dis-
tance from the slope to provide protection from slope drain-
age, erosion and shallow failures. Except as provided in
Section 1808.7.5 and Figure 1808.7.1, the following criteria
will be assumed to provide this protection. Where the exist-
ing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit hori-
zontal (100-percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be
assumed to be at the intersection of a horizontal plane drawn
from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn tangent to
the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizon-
tal. Where a retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the
slope, the height of the slope shall be measured from the top
of the wall to the top of the slope.

1808.7.2 Foundation setback from descending slope sur-
face. Foundations on or adjacent to slope surfaces shall be
founded in firm material with an embedment and set back
from the slope surface sufficient to provide vertical and lat-
eral support for the foundation without detrimental settle-
ment. Except as provided for in Section 1808.7.5 and Figure
1808.7.1, the following setback is deemed adequate to meet
the criteria. Where the slope is steeper than 1 unit vertical in
1 unit horizontal (100-percent slope), the required setback
shall be measured from an imaginary plane 45 degrees (0.79
rad) to the horizontal, projected upward from the toe of the
slope.

1808.7.3 Pools. The setback between pools regulated by
this code and slopes shall be equal to one-half the building
footing setback distance required by this section. That por-
tion of the pool wall within a horizontal distance of 7 feet
(2134 mm) from the top of the slope shall be capable of sup-
porting the water in the pool without soil support.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

399

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:51 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 1808.7.1
FOUNDATION CLEARANCES FROM SLOPES

1808.7.4 Foundation elevation. On graded sites, the top of
any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of
the street gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of an
approved drainage device a minimum of 12 inches (305
mm) plus 2 percent. Alternate elevations are permitted sub-
ject to the approval of the building official, provided it can
be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of dis-
charge and away from the structure is provided at all loca-
tions on the site.
1808.7.5 Alternate setback and clearance. Alternate set-
backs and clearances are permitted, subject to the approval
of the building official. The building official shall be permit-
ted to require a geotechnical investigation as set forth in Sec-
tion 1803.5.10.
1808.8 Concrete foundations. The design, materials and con-
struction of concrete foundations shall comply with Sections
1808.8.1 through 1808.8.6 and the pro visions of Chapter 19.
Exception: Where concrete footings supporting walls of
light-frame construction are designed in accordance with
Table 1809.7, a specific design in accordance with Chapter
19 is not required.
1808.8.1 Concrete or grout strength and mix propor-
tioning. Concrete or grout in foundations shall have a speci-
fied compressive strength (f ¢c) not less than the largest
applicable value indicated in Table 1808.8.1.
Where concrete is placed through a funnel hopper at the
top of a deep foundation element, the concrete mix shall be
designed and proportioned so as to produce a cohesive
workable mix having a slump of not less than 4 inches (102
mm) and not more than 8 inches (204 mm). Where concrete
or grout is to be pumped, the mix design including slump
shall be adjusted to produce a pumpable mixture.
1808.8.2 Concrete cover. The concrete cover provided for
prestressed and nonprestressed reinforcement in founda-
tions shall be no less than the largest applicable value speci-
fied in Table 1808.8.2. Longitudinal bars spaced less than
11/2 inches (38 mm) clear distance apart shall be considered
bundled bars for which the concrete cover provided shall
also be no less than that required by Section 7.7.4 of ACI
318. Concrete cover shall be measured from the concrete
surface to the outermost surface of the steel to which the

400

cover requirement applies. Where concrete is placed in a
temporary or permanent casing or a mandrel, the inside face
of the casing or mandrel shall be considered the concrete
surface.
1808.8.3 Placement of concrete. Concrete shall be placed
in such a manner as to ensure the exclusion of any foreign
matter and to secure a full-size foundation. Concrete shall
not be placed through water unless a tremie or other method
approved by the building official is used. Where placed
under or in the presence of water, the concrete shall be
deposited by approved means to ensure minimum segrega-
tion of the mix and negligible turbulence of the water.
Where depositing concrete from the top of a deep founda-
tion element, the concrete shall be chuted directly into
smooth-sided pipes or tubes or placed in a rapid and contin-
uous operation through a funnel hopper centered at the top
of the element.
1808.8.4 Protection of concrete. Concrete foundations
shall be protected from freezing during depositing and for a
period of not less than five days thereafter. Water shall not
be allowed to flow through the deposited concrete.
1808.8.5 Forming of concrete. Concrete foundations are
permitted to be cast against the earth where, in the opinion
of the building official, soil conditions do not require
formwork. Where formwork is required, it shall be in accor-
dance with Chapter 6 of ACI 318.
1808.8.6 Seismic requirements. See Section 1908 for
additional
requirements for
foundations of structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F, provisions of ACI 318, Sections 21.12.1 through
21.12.4, shall apply where not in conflict with the provi-
sions of Sections 1808 through 1810.
Exceptions:
1. De tached one- and two-fam i ly dwe l l ings of
light-frame construction and two stories or less
above grade plane are not required to comply with
the provisions of ACI 318, Sections 21.12.1
through 21.12.4.
2. Section 21.12.4.4(a) of ACI 318 shall not apply.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:56 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

TABLE 1808.8.1
MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH f ¢C OF CONCRETE OR GROUT

1. Foundations for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B or C

FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION

2a. Foundations for Group R or U occupancies of light-frame construction, two stories or less in height,
assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F

2b. Foundations for other structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F

3. Precast nonprestressed drived piles

4. Socketed drilled shafts

5. Micropiles

6. Precast prestressed driven piles

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.

SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE
STRENGTH, f ¢c

2,500 psi

2,500 psi

3,000 psi

4,000 psi

4,000 psi

4,000 psi

5,000 psi

TABLE 1808.8.2
MINIMUM CONCRETE COVER

FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION

MINIMUM COVER

1. Shallow foundations

In accordance with Section 7.7 of ACI 318

2. Precast nonprestressed deep foundation elements
Exposed to seawater
Not manufactured under plant conditions
Manufactured under plant control conditions

3. Precast prestressed deep foundation elements
Exposed to seawater
Other

3 inches
2 inches
In accordance with Section 7.7.3 of ACI 318

2.5 inches
In accordance with Section 7.7.3 of ACI 318

4. Cast-in-place deep foundation elements not enclosed by a steel pipe, tube or permanent
casing

2.5 inches

5. Cast-in-place deep foundation elements enclosed by a steel pipe, tube or permanent casing 1 inch

6. Structural steel core within a steel pipe, tube or permanent casing

7. Cast-in-place drilled shafts enclosed by a stable rock socket

For SI:

1 inch = 25.4 mm.

2 inches

1.5 inches

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

401

18_ibc_2009pg401.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 1:53:49 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

1808.9 Vertical masonry foundation elements. Vertical
masonry foundation elements that are not foundation piers as
defined in Section 2102.1 shall be designed as piers, walls or
columns, as applicable, in accordance with TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.

1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.
Whe re a spec i fic de s ign is no t p rov ided , conc re te o r
masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame con-
struction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with
Table 1809.7.

SECTION 1809
SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS

1809.1 General. Shallow foundations shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Sections 1809.2 through
1809.13.
1809.2 Supporting soils. Shallow foundations shall be built on
und is turbed so i l , compac ted fi l l ma ter ia l or con tro l led
low-strength material (CLSM). Compacted fill material shall
be placed in accordance with Section 1804.5. CLSM shall be
placed in accordance with Section 1804.6.
1809.3 Stepped footings. The top surface of footings shall be
level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have
a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal
(10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is neces-
sary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or
where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit verti-
cal in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
1809.4 Depth and width of footings. The minimum depth of
footings below the undisturbed ground surface shall be 12
inches (305 mm). Where applicable, the requirements of Sec-
tion 1809.5 shall also be satisfied. The minimum width of foot-
ings shall be 12 inches (305 mm).
1809.5 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected
from frost, foundations and other permanent supports of build-
ings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more
of the following methods:
1. Extending below the frost line of the locality;
2. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
3. Erecting on solid rock.
Exception: Free-standing buildings meeting all of the fol-
lowing conditions shall not be required to be protected:
1. Assigned to Occupancy Category I, in accordance
with Section 1604.5;
2. Area of 600 square feet (56 m2) or less for light-frame
construction or 400 square feet (37 m2) or less for
other than light-frame construction; and
3. Eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less.
Shallow foundations shall not bear on frozen soil unless such
frozen condition is of a permanent character.
1809.6 Location of footings. Footings on granular soil shall be
so located that the line drawn between the lower edges of
adjoining footings shall not have a slope steeper than 30
degrees (0.52 rad) with the horizontal, unless the material sup-
porting the higher footing is braced or retained or otherwise lat-
erally supported in an approved manner or a greater slope has
been properly established by engineering analysis.

TABLE 1809.7
PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTIONa, b, c, d, e

NUMBER OF FLOORS
SUPPORTED BY THE
FOOTINGf

WIDTH OF FOOTING
(inches)

THICKNESS OF
FOOTING (inches)

1

2

3

12

15

18

6

6

8g

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.
b. The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation
of the top of the footing.
c. Interior stud-bearing walls shall be permitted to be supported by isolated
footings. The footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this
table, and footings shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center.
d. See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
e. For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.
f. Footings shall be permitted to support a roof in addition to the stipulated
number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for sup-
porting one floor.
g. Plain concrete footings for Group R-3 occupancies shall be permitted to be 6
inches thick.

1809.8 Plain concrete footings. The edge thickness of plain
concrete footings supporting walls of other than light-frame
construction shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) where
placed on soil or rock.
Exception: For plain concrete footings supporting Group
R-3 occupancies, the edge thickness is permitted to be 6
inches (152 mm), provided that the footing does not extend
beyond a distance greater than the thickness of the footing
on either side of the supported wall.
1809.9 Masonry-unit footings. The design, materials and
construction of masonry-unit footings shall comply with Sec-
tions 1809.9.1 and 1809.9.2, and the provisions of Chapter 21.
Exception: Where a specific design is not provided,
masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame con-
struction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance
with Table 1809.7.
1809.9.1 Dimensions. Mansonry-unit footings shall be laid
in Type M or S mortar complying with Section 2103.8 and
the depth shall not be less than twice the projection beyond
the wall, pier or column. The width shall not be less than 8
inches (203 mm) wider than the wall supported thereon.
1809.9.2 Offsets. The maximum offset of each course in
brick foundation walls stepped up from the footings shall be
11/2 inches (38 mm) where laid in single courses, and 3
inches (76 mm) where laid in double courses.
1809.10 Pier and curtain wall foundations. Except in Seis-
mic Design Categories D, E and F, pier and curtain wall foun-
dations shall be permitted to be used to support light-frame

402

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:56 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

construction not more than two stories above grade plane, pro-
vided the following requirements are met:
1. All load-bearing walls shall be placed on continuous
concrete footings bonded integrally with the exterior
wall footings.
2. The m in imum ac tua l th ickness o f a load -bea r ing
masonry wall shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm)
nominal or 35/8 inches (92 mm) actual thickness, and
shall be bonded integrally with piers spaced 6 feet (1829
mm) on center (o.c.).
3. Piers shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 21
and the following:
3.1. The unsupported height of the masonry piers
shall not exceed 10 times their least dimension.
3.2. Where structural clay tile or hollow concrete
masonry units are used for piers supporting
beams and girders, the cellular spaces shall be
filled solidly with concrete or Type M or S mor-
tar.
Exception: Unfilled hollow piers shall be permitted
where the unsupported height of the pier is not more
than four times its least dimension.
3.3. Hollow piers shall be capped with 4 inches
(102 mm) of solid masonry or concrete or the
cavities of the top course shall be filled with
concrete or grout.
4. The maximum height of a 4-inch (102 mm) load-bearing
masonry foundation wall supporting wood frame walls
and floors shall not be more than 4 feet (1219 mm) in
height.
5. The unbalanced fill for 4-inch (102 mm) foundation
walls shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for solid
masonry, nor 12 inches (305 mm) for hollow masonry.
1809.11 Steel grillage footings. Grillage footings of structural
steel shapes shall be separated with approved steel spacers and
be entirely encased in concrete with at least 6 inches (152 mm)
on the bottom and at least 4 inches (102 mm) at all other points.
The spaces between the shapes shall be completely filled with
concrete or cement grout.
1809.12 Timber footings. Timber footings shall be permitted
for buildings of Type V construction and as otherwise
approved by the building official. Such footings shall be treated
in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Use Category 4B). Treated timbers are not required where
placed entirely below permanent water level, or where used as
capping for wood piles that project above the water level over
submerged or marsh lands. The compressive stresses perpen-
dicular to grain in untreated timber footings supported upon
treated piles shall not exceed 70 percent of the allowable
stresses for the species and grade of timber as specified in the
AF&PA NDS.
1809.13 Footing seismic ties. Where a structure is assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F in accordance with Section
1613, individual spread footings founded on soil defined in
Section 1613.5.2 as Site Class E or F shall be interconnected by
ties. Unless it is demonstrated that equivalent restraint is pro-

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

vided by reinforced concrete beams within slabs on grade or
reinforced concrete slabs on grade, ties shall be capable of car-
rying, in tension or compression, a force equal to the lesser of
the product of the larger footing design gravity load times the
seismic coefficient, SDS, divided by 10 and 25 percent of the
smaller footing design gravity load.

SECTION 1810
DEEP FOUNDATIONS

1810 .1 Genera l . Deep founda t ions sha l l be ana lyzed ,
designed, detailed and installed in accordance with Sections
1810.1 through 1810.4.
1810.1.1 Geotechnical investigation. Deep foundations
shall be designed and installed on the basis of a geotechnical
investigation as set forth in Section 1803.
1810.1.2 Use of existing deep foundation elements. Deep
foundation elements left in place where a structure has been
demolished shall not be used for the support of new con-
struction unless satisfactory evidence is submitted to the
building official, which indicates that the elements are
sound and meet the requirements of this code. Such ele-
ments shall be load tested or redriven to verify their capaci-
ties. The design load applied to such elements shall be the
lowest allowable load as determined by tests or redriving
data.
1810.1.3 Deep foundation elements classified as col-
umns. Deep foundation elements standing unbraced in air,
water or fluid soils shall be classified as columns and
designed as such in accordance with the provisions of this
code from their top down to the point where adequate lateral
support is provided in accordance with Section 1810.2.1.
Exception: Where the unsupported height to least hori-
zontal dimension of a cast-in-place deep foundation ele-
ment does not exceed three, it shall be permitted to
design and construct such an element as a pedestal in
accordance with ACI 318.
1810.1.4 Special types of deep foundations. The use of
types of deep foundation elements not specifically men-
tioned herein is permitted, subject to the approval of the
building official, upon the submission of acceptable test
data, calculations and other information relating to the
structural properties and load capacity of such elements.
The allowable stresses for materials shall not in any case
exceed the limitations specified herein.
1810.2 Analysis. The analysis of deep foundations for design
shall be in accordance with Sections 1810 .2 .1 through
1810.2.5.
1810.2.1 Lateral support. Any soil other than fluid soil
shall be deemed to afford sufficient lateral support to pre-
vent buckling of deep foundation elements and to permit the
design of the elements in accordance with accepted engi-
neering practice and the applicable provisions of this code.
Where deep foundation elements stand unbraced in air,
water or fluid soils, it shall be permitted to consider them
laterally supported at a point 5 feet (1524 mm) into stiff soil
or 10 feet (3048 mm) into soft soil unless otherwise

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

403

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:57 AM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

approved by the building official on the basis of a geotechni-
cal investigation by a registered design professional.
1810.2.2 Stability. Deep foundation elements shall be
braced to provide lateral stability in all directions. Three or
more elements connected by a rigid cap shall be considered
braced, provided that the elements are located in radial
directions from the centroid of the group not less than 60
degrees (1 rad) apart. A two-element group in a rigid cap
shall be considered to be braced along the axis connecting
the two elements. Methods used to brace deep foundation
elements shall be subject to the approval of the building offi-
cial.

Deep foundation elements supporting walls shall be
placed alternately in lines spaced at least 1 foot (305 mm)
apart and located symmetrically under the center of gravity
of the wall load carried, unless effective measures are taken
to provide for eccentricity and lateral forces, or the founda-
tion elements are adequately braced to provide for lateral
stability.

Exceptions:
1. Isolated cast-in-place deep foundation elements
without lateral bracing shall be permitted where
the least horizontal dimension is no less than 2 feet
(610 mm), adequate lateral support in accordance
with Section 1810.2.1 is provided for the entire
height and the height does not exceed 12 times the
least horizontal dimension.
2. A single row of deep foundation elements without
lateral bracing is permitted for one- and two-fam-
ily dwellings and lightweight construction not
exceeding two stories above grade plane or 35 feet
(10 668 mm) in building height, provided the cen-
ters of the elements are located within the width of
the supported wall.
1810.2.3 Settlement. The settlement of a single deep foun-
dation element or group thereof shall be estimated based on
approved methods of analysis. The predicted settlement
shall cause neither harmful distortion of, nor instability in,
the structure, nor cause any element to be loaded beyond its
capacity.
1810.2.4 Lateral loads. The moments, shears and lateral
deflections used for design of deep foundation elements
shall be established considering the nonlinear interaction of
the shaft and soil, as determined by a registered design pro-
fessional. Where the ratio of the depth of embedment of the
element to its least horizontal dimension is less than or equal
to six, it shall be permitted to assume the element is rigid.

1810.2.4.1 Seismic Design Categories D through F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F, deep foundation elements on Site Class E or F sites,
as determined in Section 1613.5.2, shall be designed and
constructed to withstand maximum imposed curvatures
from earthquake ground motions and structure response.
Curvatures shall include free-field soil strains modified
for soil-foundation-structure interaction coupled with

foundation element deformations associated with earth-
quake loads imparted to the foundation by the structure.
Exception: Deep foundation elements that satisfy the
following additional detailing requirements shall be
deemed to comp ly w ith the curvature capacity
requirements of this section.
1. Precast prestressed concrete piles detailed in
accordance with Section 1810.3.8.3.3.
2. Cast-in-place deep foundation elements with a
minimum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of
0.005 extending the full length of the element
and de ta i led in accordance w i th Sec t ions
21.6.4.2, 21.6.4.3 and 21.6.4.4 of ACI 318 as
required by Section 1810.3.9.4.2.2.
1810.2.5 Group effects. The analysis shall include group
effects on lateral behavior where the center-to-center spac-
ing of deep foundation elements in the direction of lateral
force is less than eight times the least horizontal dimension
of an element. The analysis shall include group effects on
axial behavior where the center-to-center spacing of deep
foundation elements is less than three times the least hori-
zontal dimension of an element.
1810.3 Design and detailing. Deep foundations shall be
designed and detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.1
through 1810.3.12.
1810.3.1 Design conditions. Design of deep foundations
shall include the design conditions specified in Sections
1810.3.1.1 through 1810.3.1.6, as applicable.
1810.3.1.1 Design methods for concrete elements.
Where concrete deep foundations are laterally supported
in accordance with Section 1810.2.1 for the entire height
and applied forces cause bending moments no greater
than those resulting from accidental eccentricities, struc-
tural design of the element using the load combinations
of Section 1605.3 and the allowable stresses specified in
this chapter shall be permitted. Otherwise, the structural
design of concrete deep foundation elements shall use
the load combinations of Section 1605.2 and approved
strength design methods.
1810.3.1.2 Composite elements. Where a single deep
foundation element comprises two or more sections of
different materials or different types spliced together,
each section of the composite assembly shall satisfy the
applicable requirements of this code, and the maximum
allowable load in each section shall be limited by the
structural capacity of that section.
1810.3.1.3 Mislocation. The foundation or superstruc-
ture shall be designed to resist the effects of the
mislocation of any deep foundation element by no less
th an 3 inche s (76 mm ) . To r e s i s t the e ffec t s o f
mislocation, compressive overload of deep foundation
elements to 110 percent of the allowable design load
shall be permitted.
1810.3.1.4 Driven piles. Driven piles shall be designed
and manufactured in accordance with accepted engineer-

404

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:57 AM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ing practice to resist all stresses induced by handling,
driving and service loads.
1810.3.1.5 Helical piles. Helical piles shall be designed
and manufactured in accordance with accepted engineer-
ing practice to resist all stresses induced by installation
into the ground and service loads.
1810.3.1.6 Casings. Temporary and permanent casings
shall be of steel and shall be sufficiently strong to resist
collapse and sufficiently water tight to exclude any for-
eign materials during the placing of concrete. Where a
permanent casing is considered reinforcing steel, the
steel shall be protected under the conditions specified in
Section 1810.3.2.5. Horizontal joints in the casing shall
be spliced in accordance with Section 1810.3.6.
1810.3.2 Materials. The materials used in deep foundation
elements shall satisfy the requirements of Sections
1810.3.2.1 through 1810.3.2.8, as applicable.
1810.3.2.1 Concrete. Where concrete is cast in a steel
pipe or where an enlarged base is formed by compacting
concrete, the maximum size for coarse aggregate shall be
3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Concrete to be compacted shall have
a zero slump.
1810.3.2.1.1 Seismic hooks. For structures assigned

to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F in accor-
dance with Section 1613, the ends of hoops, spirals
and ties used in concrete deep foundation elements
shall be terminated with seismic hooks, as defined in
ACI 318, and shall be turned into the confined con-
crete core.
1810.3.2.1.2 ACI 318 Equation (10-5). Where this
chapter requires detailing of concrete deep founda-
tion elements in accordance with Section 21.6.4.4 of
ACI 318, compliance with Equation (10-5) of ACI
318 shall not be required.
1810.3.2.2 Prestressing steel. Prestressing steel shall
conform to ASTM A 416.
1810.3.2.3 Structural steel. Structural steel piles, steel
pipe and fully welded steel piles fabricated from plates
shall conform to ASTM A 36, ASTM A 252, ASTM A
283, ASTM A 572, ASTM A 588, ASTM A 690, ASTM
A 913 or ASTM A 992.
1810.3.2.4 Timber. Timber deep foundation elements
shall be designed as piles or poles in accordance with
AF&PA NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to
ASTM D 25. Sawn timber elements shall conform to
DOC PS-20.
1810.3.2.4.1 Preservative treatment. Timber deep
foundation elements used to support permanent struc-
tures shall be treated in accordance with this section
unless it is established that the tops of the untreated
t i m b e r e l e m e n t s w i l l b e b e l o w t h e l o w e s t
ground-water level assumed to exist during the life of
the structure. Preservative and minimum final reten-
tion shall be in accordance with AWPA U1 (Com-
modity Specification E, Use Category 4C) for round
timber elements and AWPA U1 (Commodity Specifi-

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

cation A, Use Category 4B) for sawn timber elements.
Preservative-treated timber elements shall be subject
to a quality control program administered by an
approved agency. Element cutoffs shall be treated in
accordance with AWPA M4.
1810.3.2.5 Protection of materials. Where boring
records or site conditions indicate possible deleterious
action on the materials used in deep foundation elements
because of soil constituents, changing water levels or
other factors, the elements shall be adequately protected
by materials, methods or processes approved by the
building official. Protective materials shall be applied to
the elements so as not to be rendered ineffective by
installation. The effectiveness of such protective mea-
sures for the particular purpose shall have been thor-
oughly established by satisfactory service records or
other evidence.
1810.3.2.6 Allowable stresses. The allowable stresses
for materials used in deep foundation elements shall not
exceed those specified in Table 1810.3.2.6.
1810.3.2.7 Increased allowable compressive stress for
cased cast-in-place elements. The allowable compres-
sive stress in the concrete shall be permitted to be
increased as specified in Table 1810.3.2.6 for those por-
tions of permanently cased cast-in-place elements that
satisfy all of the following conditions:
1. The design shall not use the casing to resist any
portion of the axial load imposed.
2. The casing shall have a sealed tip and be mandrel
driven.
3. The thickness of the casing shall not be less than
manufacturer’s standard gage No. 14 (0.068 inch)
(1.75 mm).
4. The casing shall be seamless or provided with
seams of strength equal to the basic material and be
of a configuration that will provide confinement to
the cast-in-place concrete.
5. The ratio of steel yield strength (Fy) to specified
compressive strength (f ¢c) shall not be less than
six.
6. The nominal diameter of the element shall not be
greater than 16 inches (406 mm).
1810.3.2.8 Justification of higher allowable stresses.
Use of allowable stresses greater than those specified in
Section 1810.3.2.6 shall be permitted where supporting
data justifying such higher stresses is filed with the build-
ing official. Such substantiating data shall include:
1. A geotechnical investigation in accordance with
Section 1803; and
2. L o a d t e s t s i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
1810.3.3.1.2, regardless of the load supported by
the element.
The design and installation of the deep foundation ele-
ments shall be under the direct supervision of a regis-
tered design professional knowledgeable in the field of

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

405

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:58 AM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

TABLE 1810.3.2.6
ALLOWABLE STRESSES FOR MATERIALS USED IN DEEP FOUNDATION ELEMENTS

MATERIAL TYPE AND CONDITION

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESS a

1. Concrete or grout in compressionb
Cast-in-place with a permanent casing in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.7
Cast-in-place in a pipe, tube, other permanent casing or rock
Cast-in-place without a permanent casing
Precast nonprestressed
Precast prestressed

2. Nonprestressed reinforcement in compression

3. Structural steel in compression
Cores within concrete-filled pipes or tubes
Pipes, tubes or H-piles, where justified in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.8
Pipes or tubes for micropiles
Other pipes, tubes or H-piles
Helical piles

4. Nonprestressed reinforcement in tension
Within micropiles
Other conditions

5. Structural steel in tension
Pipes, tubes or H-piles, where justified in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.8
Other pipes, tubes or H-piles
Helical piles

0.4 f ¢c
0.33 f ¢c
0.3 f ¢c
0.33 f ¢c
0.33 f ¢c - 0.27 fpc

0.4 fy £ 30,000 psi

0.5 Fy £ 32,000 psi
0.5 Fy £ 32,000 psi
0.4 Fy £ 32,000 psi
0.35 Fy £ 16,000 psi

0.6 Fy £ 0.5 Fu

0.6 fy
0.5 fy £ 24,000 psi

0.5 Fy £ 32,000 psi
0.35 Fy £ 16,000 psi

0.6 Fy £ 0.5 Fu

6. Timber

In accordance with the AF&PA NDS

a. f ¢c is the specified compressive strength of the concrete or grout; fpc is the compressive stress on the gross concrete section due to effective prestress forces only; fy is
the specified yield strength of reinforcement; Fy is the specified minimum yield stress of structural steel; Fu is the specified minimum tensile stress of structural
steel.
b. The stresses specified apply to the gross cross-sectional area within the concrete surface. Where a temporary or permanent casing is used, the inside face of the cas-
ing shall be considered the concrete surface.

soil mechanics and deep foundations who shall submit a
report to the building official stating that the elements as
installed satisfy the design criteria.
1810.3.3 Determination of allowable loads. The allow-
able axial and lateral loads on deep foundation elements
shall be determined by an approved formula, load tests or
method of analysis.
1810.3.3.1 Allowable axial load. The allowable axial
load on a deep foundation element shall be determined in
a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n s 1 8 1 0 . 3 . 3 . 1 . 1 t h r o u g h
1810.3.3.1.9.
1810.3.3.1.1 Driving criteria. The allowable com-
pressive load on any driven deep foundation element
where determined by the application of an approved
driving formula shall not exceed 40 tons (356 kN).
For allowable loads above 40 tons (356 kN), the wave
equation method of analysis shall be used to estimate
driveability for both driving stresses and net displace-
ment per blow at the ultimate load. Allowable loads
shall be verified by load tests in accordance with Sec-
tion 1810.3.3.1.2. The formula or wave equation load
shall be determined for gravity-drop or power-actu-
ated hammers and the hammer energy used shall be
the maximum consistent with the size, strength and

406

weight of the driven elements. The use of a follower is
permitted only with the approval of the building offi-
cial. The introduction of fresh hammer cushion or pile
cushion material just prior to final penetration is not
permitted.

1810.3.3.1.2 Load tests. Where design compressive
loads are greater than those determined using the
allowable stresses specified in Section 1810.3.2.6,
where the design load for any deep foundation ele-
ment is in doubt, or where cast-in-place deep founda-
tion elements have an enlarged base formed either by
compacting concrete or by driving a precast base,
control test elements shall be tested in accordance
with ASTM D 1143 or ASTM D 4945. At least one
element shall be load tested in each area of uniform
subsoil conditions. Where required by the building
official, additional elements shall be load tested where
necessary to establish the safe design capacity. The
resulting allowable loads shall not be more than
one-half of the ultimate axial load capacity of the test
element as assessed by one of the published methods
listed in Section 1810.3.3.1.3 with consideration for
the test type, duration and subsoil. The ultimate axial
load capacity shall be determined by a registered
design professional with consideration given to toler-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:58 AM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

able total and differential settlements at design load in
accordance with Section 1810.2.3. In subsequent
installation of the balance of deep foundation ele-
ments, all elements shall be deemed to have a support-
ing capacity equal to that of the control element where
such elements are of the same type, size and relative
length as the test element; are installed using the same
or comparable methods and equipment as the test ele-
ment; are installed in similar subsoil conditions as the
test element; and, for driven elements, where the rate
of penetration (e.g., net displacement per blow) of
such elements is equal to or less than that of the test
element driven with the same hammer through a com-
parable driving distance.
1810.3.3.1.3 Load test evaluation methods. It shall
be permitted to evaluate load tests of deep foundation
elements using any of the following methods:
1. Davisson Offset Limit.
2. Brinch-Hansen 90% Criterion.
3. Butler-Hoy Criterion.
4. Other methods approved by the building offi-
cial.

1810.3.3.1.4 Allowable frictional resistance. The
assumed frictional resistance developed by any
uncased cast-in-place deep foundation element shall
not exceed one-sixth of the bearing value of the soil
material  at  minimum  depth  as  set  forth  in Table
1806.2, up to a maximum of 500 psf (24 kPa), unless a
greater value is allowed by the building official on the
basis of a geotechnical investigation as specified in
Section 1803 or a greater value is substantiated by a
load test in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2.
Frictional resistance and bearing resistance shall not
be assumed to act simultaneously unless determined
by a geotechnical investigation in accordance with
Section 1803.
1810.3.3.1.5 Uplift capacity of a single deep foun-
dation element. Where required by the design, the
uplift capacity of a single deep foundation element
shall be determined by an approved method of analy-
sis based on a minimum factor of safety of three or by
load tests conducted in accordance with ASTM D
3689. The maximum allowable uplift load shall not
exceed the ultimate load capacity as determined in
Section 1810.3.3.1.2, using the results of load tests
conducted in accordance with ASTM D 3689, divided
by a factor of safety of two.
Exception: Where uplift is due to wind or seismic
loading, the minimum factor of safety shall be two
where capacity is determined by an analysis and
one and one-half where capacity is determined by
load tests.
1810.3.3.1.6 Uplift capacity of grouped deep foun-
dation elements. For grouped deep foundation ele-
ments subjected to uplift, the allowable working uplift
load for the group shall be calculated by an approved
method of analysis where the deep foundation ele-

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

ments in the group are placed at a center-to-center
spacing of at least 2.5 times the least horizontal
dimension of the largest single element, the allowable
working uplift load for the group is permitted to be
calculated as the lesser of:
1. The proposed individual uplift working load
times the number of elements in the group.
2. Two-thirds of the effective weight of the group
and the soil contained within a block defined by
the perimeter of the group and the length of the
element.
1810.3.3.1.7 Load-bearing capacity. Deep founda-
tion elements shall develop ultimate load capacities of
at least twice the design working loads in the desig-
nated load-bearing layers. Analysis shall show that no
soil layer underlying the designated load-bearing lay-
ers causes the load-bearing capacity safety factor to
be less than two.
1810.3.3.1.8 Bent deep foundation elements. The
load-bearing capacity of deep foundation elements
discovered to have a sharp or sweeping bend shall be
determined by an approved method of analysis or by
load testing a representative element.
1810.3.3.1.9 Helical piles. The allowable axial
design load, Pa, of helical piles shall be determined as
follows:

(Equation 18-4)

Pa = 0.5 Pu
where Pu is the least value of:
1. Sum of the areas of the helical bearing plates
times the ultimate bearing capacity of the soil or
rock comprising the bearing stratum.
2. Ultimate capacity determined from well-docu-
mented correlations with installation torque.
3. Ultimate capacity determined from load tests.
4. Ultimate axial capacity of pile shaft.
5. Ultimate axial capacity of pile shaft couplings.
6. Sum of the ultimate axial capacity of helical
bearing plates affixed to pile.
1810.3.3.2 Allowable lateral load. Where required by
the design, the lateral load capacity of a single deep foun-
dation element or a group thereof shall be determined by
an approved method of analysis or by lateral load tests to
at least twice the proposed design working load. The
resulting allowable load shall not be more than one-half
of the load that produces a gross lateral movement of 1
inch (25 mm) at the lower of the top of foundation ele-
ment and the ground surface, unless it can be shown that
the predicted lateral movement shall cause neither harm-
ful distortion of, nor instability in, the structure, nor
cause any element to be loaded beyond its capacity.
1810.3.4 Subsiding soils. Where deep foundation elements
are installed through subsiding fills or other subsiding strata
and derive support from underlying firmer materials, con-
sideration shall be given to the downward frictional forces

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

407

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:58 AM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

that may be imposed on the elements by the subsiding upper
strata.
Where the influence of subsiding fills is considered as
imposing loads on the element, the allowable stresses speci-
fied in this chapter shall be permitted to be increased where
satisfactory substantiating data are submitted.
1810.3.5 Dimensions of deep foundation elements. The
dimensions of deep foundation elements shall be in accor-
dance with Sections 1810.3.5.1 through 1810.3.5.3, as
applicable.
1810.3.5.1 Precast. The minimum lateral dimension of
precast concrete deep foundation elements shall be 8
inches (203 mm). Corners of square elements shall be
chamfered.
1 8 1 0 . 3 . 5 . 2 C a s t - i n - p l a c e o r g ro u t e d - i n - p l a c e .
Cast-in-place and grouted-in-place deep foundation ele-
ments shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
1810.3.5.2.1 Cased. Cast-in-place deep foundation
elements with a permanent casing shall have a nomi-
nal outside diameter of not less than 8 inches (203
mm).
1810.3.5.2.2 Uncased. Cast-in-place deep founda-
tion elements without a permanent casing shall have a
diameter of not less than 12 inches (305 mm). The ele-
ment length shall not exceed 30 times the average
diameter.
Exception: The length of the element is permitted
to exceed 30 times the diameter, provided the
design and installation of the deep foundations are
under the direct supervision of a registered design
professional knowledgeable in the field of soil
mechanics and deep foundations. The registered
design professional shall submit a report to the
building official stating that the elements were
installed in compliance with the approved con-
struction documents.

1810.3.5.2.3 Micropiles. Micropiles shall have an
outside diameter of 12 inches (305 mm) or less. The
minimum diameter set forth elsewhere in Section
1810.3.5 shall not apply to micropiles.
1810.3.5.3 Steel. Steel deep foundation elements shall
satisfy the requirements of this section.
1810.3.5.3.1 H-piles. Sections of H-piles shall com-
ply with the following:
1. The flange projections shall not exceed 14
times the minimum thickness of metal in either
the flange or the web and the flange widths shall
not be less than 80 percent of the depth of the
section.
2. The nominal depth in the direction of the web
shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm).
3. Flanges and web shall have a minimum nomi-
nal thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).
1810.3.5.3.2 Steel pipes and tubes. Steel pipes and
tubes used as deep foundation elements shall have a

408

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:59 AM

22

nominal outside diameter of not less than 8 inches
(203 mm). Where steel pipes or tubes are driven open
ended, they shall have a minimum of 0.34 square inch
(219 mm2) of steel in cross section to resist each 1,000
foot-pounds (1356 Nm) of pile hammer energy, or
shall have the equivalent strength for steels having a
yield strength greater than 35,000 psi (241 MPa) or
the wave equation analysis shall be permitted to be
used to assess compression stresses induced by driv-
ing to evaluate if the pile section is appropriate for the
selected hammer. Where a pipe or tube with wall
thickness less than 0.179 inch (4.6 mm) is driven open
ended, a suitable cutting shoe shall be provided. Con-
crete-filled steel pipes or tubes in structures assigned
to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall have a
wall thickness of not less than 3/16 inch (5 mm). The
pipe or tube casing for socketed drilled shafts shall
have a nominal outside diameter of not less than 18
inches (457 mm), a wall thickness of not less than 3/8
inch (9.5 mm) and a suitable steel driving shoe welded
to the bottom; the diameter of the rock socket shall be
approximately equal to the inside diameter of the cas-
ing.

Exceptions:

1. There is no minimum diameter for steel
pipes or tubes used in micropiles.
2. For mandrel-driven pipes or tubes, the mini-
mum wall thickness shall be 1/10 inch (2.5
mm).
1810.3.5.3.3 Helical piles. Dimensions of the central
shaft and the number, size and thickness of helical
bearing plates shall be sufficient to support the design
loads.

1810.3.6 Splices. Splices shall be constructed so as to pro-
vide and maintain true alignment and position of the compo-
nent parts of the deep foundation element during installation
and subsequent thereto and shall be designed to resist the
axial and shear forces and moments occurring at the loca-
tion of the splice during driving and for design load combi-
nations. Where deep foundation elements of the same type
are being spliced, splices shall develop not less than 50 per-
cent of the bending strength of the weaker section. Where
deep foundation elements of different materials or different
types are being spliced, splices shall develop the full com-
pressive strength and not less than 50 percent of the tension
and bending strength of the weaker section. Where struc-
tural steel cores are to be spliced, the ends shall be milled or
ground to provide full contact and shall be full-depth
welded.

Splices occurring in the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of the
embedded portion of an element shall be designed to resist
at allowable stresses the moment and shear that would result
from an assumed eccentricity of the axial load of 3 inches
(76 mm), or the element shall be braced in accordance with
Section 1810.2.2 to other deep foundation elements that do
not have splices in the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of
embedment.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1810.3.6.1 Seismic Design Categories C through F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D,
E or F splices of deep foundation elements shall develop
the lesser of the following:
1. The full strength of the deep foundation element;
and
2. The axial and shear forces and moments from the
load combinations with overstrength factor in Sec-
tion 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7.
1810.3.7 Top of element detailing at cutoffs. Where a
minimum length for reinforcement or the extent of closely
spaced confinement reinforcement is specified at the top of
a deep foundation element, provisions shall be made so that
those specified lengths or extents are maintained after cut-
off.
1810.3.8 Precast concrete piles. Precast concrete piles
shall be designed and detailed in accordance with Sections
1810.3.8.1 through 1810.3.8.3.
1810.3.8.1 Reinforcement. Longitudinal steel shall be
arranged in a symmetrical pattern and be laterally tied
with steel ties or wire spiral spaced center to center as fol-
lows:
1. At not more than 1 inch (25 mm) for the first five
ties or spirals at each end; then
2. At not more than 4 inches (102 mm), for the
remainder of the first 2 feet (610 mm) from each
end; and then
3. At not more than 6 inches (152 mm) elsewhere.
The size of ties and spirals shall be as follows:
1. For piles having a least horizontal dimension of 16
inches (406 mm) or less, wire shall not be smaller
than 0.22 inch (5.6 mm) (No. 5 gage).
2. For piles having a least horizontal dimension of
more than 16 inches (406 mm) and less than 20
inches (508 mm), wire shall not be smaller than
0.238 inch (6 mm) (No. 4 gage).
3. For piles having a least horizontal dimension of 20
inches (508 mm) and larger, wire shall not be
smaller than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) round or 0.259 inch
(6.6 mm) (No. 3 gage).
1810 .3 .8 .2 Precast nonprestressed p iles . Precas t
nonprestressed concrete piles shall comply with the
r e q u i r em e n t s o f S e c t i o n s 1 8 1 0 . 3 . 8 . 2 . 1 t h r o u g h
1810.3.8.2.3.
1810.3.8.2.1 Minimum reinforcement. Longitudi-
nal reinforcement shall consist of at least four bars
with a minimum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of
0.008.
1810.3.8.2.2 Seismic reinforcement in Seismic
Design Categories C through F. For structures

assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F in
accordance with Section 1613 , precast nonpre-
stressed piles shall be reinforced as specified in this

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

section. The minimum longitudinal reinforcement
ratio shall be 0.01 throughout the length. Transverse
reinforcement shall consist of closed ties or spirals
with a minimum 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) diameter. Spacing
of transverse reinforcement shall not exceed the
smaller of eight times the diameter of the smallest lon-
gitudinal bar or 6 inches (152 mm) within a distance
of three times the least pile dimension from the bot-
tom of the pile cap. Spacing of transverse reinforce-
ment shall not exceed 6 inches (152 mm) throughout
the remainder of the pile.
1810.3.8.2.3 Additional seismic reinforcement in
Seismic Design Categories D through F. For struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F
in accordance with Section 1613, transverse rein-
forcement shall be in acco rdance with Section
1810.3.9.4.2.
1810.3.8.3 Precast prestressed piles. Precast pre-
stressed concrete piles shall comply with the require-
ments of Sections 1810.3.8.3.1 through 1810.3.8.3.3.
1810.3.8.3.1 Effective prestress. The effective pre-
stress in the pile shall not be less than 400 psi (2.76
MPa) for piles up to 30 feet (9144 mm) in length, 550
psi (3.79 MPa) for piles up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) in
length and 700 psi (4.83 MPa) for piles greater than
50 feet (15 240 mm) in length.
Effective prestress shall be based on an assumed
loss of 30,000 psi (207 MPa) in the prestressing steel.
The tensile stress in the prestressing steel shall not
exceed the values specified in ACI 318.
1810.3.8.3.2 Seismic reinforcement in Seismic
Design Category C. For structures assigned to Seis-
mic Design Category C in accordance with Section
1613, precast prestressed piles shall have transverse
reinforcement in accordance with this section. The
volumetric ratio of spiral reinforcement shall not be
less than the amount required by the following for-
mula for the upper 20 feet (6096 mm) of the pile.

(Equation 18-5)

rs=0.12 f ¢c / fyh
where:
f ¢c = Specified compressive strength of concrete,
psi (MPa).
fyh = Yield strength of spiral reinforcement
# 85,000 psi (586 MPa).
rs = Spiral reinforcement index (vol. spiral/vol.
core).
At least one-half the volumetric ratio required by
Equation 18-5 shall be provided below the upper 20
feet (6096 mm) of the pile.
1810.3.8.3.3 Seismic reinforcement in Seismic
Design Categories D through F. For structures

assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F in
accordance with Section 1613, precast prestressed

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

409

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:52:59 AM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

piles shall have transverse reinforcement in accor-
dance with the following:
1. Requirements in ACI 318, Chapter 21, need not
apply, unless specifically referenced.
2. Where the total pile length in the soil is 35 feet
(10 668 mm) or less, the lateral transverse rein-
forcement in the ductile region shall occur
through the length of the pile. Where the pile
length exceeds 35 feet (10 668 mm), the ductile
pile region shall be taken as the greater of 35
feet (10 668 mm) or the distance from the
underside of the pile cap to the point of zero cur-
vature plus three times the least pile dimension.
3. In the ductile region, the center-to-center spac-
ing of the spirals or hoop reinforcement shall
not exceed one-fifth of the least pile dimension,
six times the diameter of the longitudinal strand
or 8 inches (203 mm), whichever is smallest.
4. Circular spiral reinforcement shall be spliced
by lapping one full turn and bending the end of
each spiral to a 90-degree hook or by use of a
mechanical or welded splice complying with
Section 12.14.3 of ACI 318.
5. Where the transverse reinforcement consists of
circular spirals, the volumetric ratio of spiral
transverse reinforcement in the ductile region
shall comply with the following:
r s = 0.25(f ¢c /fyh)(Ag /Ach – 1.0)
[0.5 + 1.4P/(f ¢c Ag)]

(Equation 18-6)

but not less than:
r s = 0.12(f ¢c /fyh) [0.5 + 1.4P/(f ¢c Ag)]
$ 0.12 f ¢c / fyh

(Equation 18-7)

and need not exceed:

r s = 0.021

(Equation 18-8)

where:
Ag = Pile cross-sectional area, square inches
(mm2).
Ach = Core area defined by spiral outside diam-
eter, square inches (mm2).
f ¢c = Specified compressive strength of con-
crete, psi (MPa)
fyh = Yield strength of spiral reinforcement
# 85,000 psi (586 MPa).
P = Axial load on pile, pounds (kN), as deter-
mined from Equations 16-5 and 16-7.
rs= Volumetric ratio (vol. spiral/ vol. core).

410

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:53:00 AM

24

This required amount of spiral reinforcement
is permitted to be obtained by providing an
inner and outer spiral.
6. Where transverse reinforcement consists of
rectangular hoops and cross ties, the total
cross-sectional area of lateral transverse rein-
forcement in the ductile region with spacing, s,
and perpendicular dimension, hc, shall conform
to:
Ash = 0.3s hc (f ¢c /fyh)(Ag /Ach – 1.0)
[0.5 + 1.4P/(f ¢c Ag)]

(Equation 18-9)

but not less than:
Ash = 0.12s hc (f ¢c /fyh) [0.5 + 1.4P/(f ¢c Ag)]

(Equation 18-10)

s

where:
fyh = # 70,000 psi (483 MPa).
hc = Cross-sectional dimension of pile core
measured center to center of hoop rein-
forcement, inch (mm).
= Spac ing of transverse re inforcemen t
measured a long leng th of p ile , inch
(mm).
Ash = Cross-sectional area of tranverse rein-
forcement, square inches (mm2).
f ¢c = Specified compressive strength of con-
crete, psi (MPa).
The hoops and cross ties shall be equivalent to
deformed bars not less than No. 3 in size. Rectangular
hoop ends shall terminate at a corner with seismic
hooks.
Outside of the length of the pile requiring trans-
verse confinement reinforcing, the spiral or hoop
reinforcing with a volumetric ratio not less than
one-half of that required for transverse confinement
reinforcing shall be provided.
1810.3.9 Cast-in-place deep foundations. Cast-in-place
deep foundation elements shall be designed and detailed in
accordance with Sections 1810.3.9.1 through 1810.3.9.6.
1810.3.9.1 Design cracking moment. The design
cracking moment (fMn) for a cast-in-place deep founda-
tion element not enclosed by a structural steel pipe or
tube shall be determined using the following equation:

fM

n

=

3

f S

¢
c m

(Equation 18-11)

where:
f ¢c = Specified compressive strength of concrete or
grout, psi (MPa)
Sm = Elastic section modulus, neglecting reinforce-
ment and casing, cubic inches (mm3)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1810.3.9.2 Required reinforcement. Where subject to
uplift or where the required moment strength determined
using the load combinations of Section 1605.2 exceeds
the design cracking moment determined in accordance
with Section 1810.3.9.1, cast-in-place deep foundations
not enclosed by a structural steel pipe or tube shall be
reinforced.
1810.3.9.3 Placement of reinforcement. Reinforce-
ment where required shall be assembled and tied
together and shall be placed in the deep foundation ele-
ment as a unit before the reinforced portion of the ele-
ment is filled with concrete.
Exceptions:
1. Steel dowels embedded 5 feet (1524 mm) or
less shall be permitted to be placed after con-
creting, while the concrete is still in a semifluid
state.
2. For deep foundation elements installed with a
hollow-stem auger, tied reinforcement shall be
placed after elements are concreted, while the
concrete is still in a semifluid state. Longitudi-
nal reinforcement without lateral ties shall be
placed either through the hollow stem of the
auger prior to concreting or after concreting,
while the concrete is still in a semifluid state.
3. For Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceed-
ing two stories of light-frame construction,
reinforcement is permitted to be placed after
concreting, while the concrete is still in a semi-
fluid state, and the concrete cover requirement
is permitted to be reduced to 2 inches (51 mm),
provided the construction method can be dem-
onstrated to the satisfaction of the building offi-
cial.

1810.3.9.4 Seismic reinforcement. Where a structure is
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, reinforcement
s h a l l b e p r o v i d e d i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
1810.3.9.4.1. Where a structure is assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F, reinforcement shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Section 1810.3.9.4.2.
Exceptions:
1. Isolated deep foundation elements supporting
posts of Group R-3 and U occupancies not
exceeding two stories of light-frame construc-
tion shall be permitted to be reinforced as
required by rational analysis but with not less
than one No. 4 bar, without ties or spirals,
where detailed so the element is not subject to
lateral loads and the soil provides adequate lat-
e r a l suppo r t in a c co rd an c e w i th S e c t ion
1810.2.1.
2. Isolated deep foundation elements supporting
posts and bracing from decks and patios appur-
tenant to Group R-3 and U occupancies not
exceeding two stories of light-frame construc-

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

tion shall be permitted to be reinforced as
required by rational analysis but with not less
than one No. 4 bar, without ties or spirals,
where the lateral load, E, to the top of the ele-
ment does not exceed 200 pounds (890 N) and
the soil provides adequate lateral support in
accordance with Section 1810.2.1.
3. Deep foundation elements supporting the con-
crete foundation wall of Group R-3 and U occu-
p a n c i e s n o t e x c e e d i n g t w o s t o r i e s o f
light-frame construction shall be permitted to
be reinforced as required by rational analysis
but with not less than two No. 4 bars, without
ties or spirals, where the design cracking
moment determined in accordance with Section
1810 .3 .9 .1 exceed s the requ i red momen t
strength determined using the load combina-
t ions w i th ove rs t reng th fac to r in Sec t ion
12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7 and the soil provides ade-
quate lateral support in accordance with Sec-
tion 1810.2.1.
4. Closed ties or spirals where required by Section
1810.3.9.4.2 shall be permitted to be limited to
the top 3 feet (914 mm) of deep foundation ele-
ments 10 feet (3048 mm) or less in depth sup-
porting Group R-3 and U occupancies of
Seismic Design Category D, not exceeding two
stories of light-frame construction.
1810.3.9.4.1 Seismic reinforcement in Seismic
Design Category C. For structures assigned to Seis-
mic Design Category C in accordance with Section
1613, cast-in-place deep foundation elements shall be
reinforced as specified in this section. Reinforcement
shall be provided where required by analysis.
A minimum of four longitudinal bars, with a mini-
mum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 0.0025, shall
be provided for throughout the minimum reinforced
length of the element as defined below starting at the
top of the element. The minimum reinforced length of
the element shall be taken as the greatest of the fol-
lowing:
1. One-third of the element length;
2. A distance of 10 feet (3048 mm);
3. Three times the least element dimension; and
4. The distance from the top of the element to the
point where the design cracking moment deter-
mined in accordance with Section 1810.3.9.1
exceeds the required moment strength deter-
mined using the load combinations of Section
1605.2.
Transverse reinforcement shall consist of closed
ties or spirals with a minimum 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) diam-
eter. Spacing of transverse reinforcement shall not
exceed the smaller of 6 inches (152 mm) or 8-longitu-
dinal-bar diameters, within a distance of three times

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

411

18_ibc_2009pg411-415.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:42:18 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

the least element dimension from the bottom of the
pile cap. Spacing of transverse reinforcement shall
not exceed 16 longitudinal bar diameters throughout
the remainder of the reinforced length.
Exceptions:
1. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to concrete cast in structural steel
pipes or tubes.
2. A spiral-welded metal casing of a thickness
not less than manufacturer’s standard gage
No. 14 gage (0.068 inch) is permitted to pro-
vide concrete confinement in lieu of the
closed ties or spirals. Where used as such,
the metal casing shall be protected against
possible deleterious action due to soil con-
stituents, changing water levels or other fac-
tors indicated by boring records of site
conditions.
1810.3.9.4.2 Seismic reinforcement in Seismic
Design Categories D through F. For structures

assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F in
accordance with Section 1613, cast-in-place deep
foundation elements shall be reinforced as specified
in this section. Reinforcement shall be provided
where required by analysis.
A minimum of four longitudinal bars, with a mini-
mum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 0.005, shall
be provided throughout the minimum reinforced
length of the element as defined below starting at the
top of the element. The minimum reinforced length of
the element shall be taken as the greatest of the fol-
lowing:
1. One-half of the element length;
2. A distance of 10 feet (3048 mm);
3. Three times the least element dimension; and
4. The distance from the top of the element to the
point where the design cracking moment deter-
mined in accordance with Section 1810.3.9.1
exceeds the required moment strength deter-
mined using the load combinations of Section
1605.2.
Transverse reinforcement shall consist of closed
ties or spirals no smaller than No. 3 bars for elements
with a least dimension up to 20 inches (508 mm), and
No. 4 bars for larger elements. Throughout the
remainder of the reinforced length outside the regions
with transverse confinement reinforcement, as speci-
fied in Section 1810.3.9.4.2.1 or 1810.3.9.4.2.2, the
spacing of transverse reinforcement shall not exceed
the least of the following:
1. 12 longitudinal bar diameters;
2. One-half the least dimension of the element;
and

3. 12 inches (305 mm).
Exceptions:

1. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to concrete cast in structural steel
pipes or tubes.
2. A spiral-welded metal casing of a thickness
not less than manufacturer’s standard gage
No. 14 gage (0.068 inch) is permitted to pro-
vide concrete confinement in lieu of the
closed ties or spirals. Where used as such,
the metal casing shall be protected against
possible deleterious action due to soil con-
stituents, changing water levels or other fac-
tors indicated by boring records of site
conditions.
1810.3.9.4.2.1 Site Classes A through D. For Site
Class A, B, C or D sites, transverse confinement
reinforcement shall be provided in the element in
accordance with Sections 21.6.4.2, 21.6.4.3 and
21.6.4.4 of ACI 318 within three times the least
element dimension of the bottom of the pile cap. A
transverse spiral reinforcement ratio of not less
t h a n o n e - h a l f o f t h a t r e q u i r e d i n S e c t i o n
21.6.4.4(a) of ACI 318 shall be permitted.

1810.3.9.4.2.2 Site Classes E and F. For Site
Class E or F sites, transverse confinement rein-
forcement shall be provided in the element in
accordance with Sections 21.6.4.2, 21.6.4.3 and
21.6.4.4 of ACI 318 within seven times the least
element dimension of the pile cap and within seven
times the least element dimension of the interfaces
of strata that are hard or stiff and strata that are
liquefiable or are composed of soft- to medium-
stiff clay.

1810.3.9.5 Belled drilled shafts. Where drilled shafts
are belled at the bottom, the edge thickness of the bell
shall not be less than that required for the edge of foot-
ings. Where the sides of the bell slope at an angle less
than 60 degrees (1 rad) from the horizontal, the effects of
vertical shear shall be considered.

1810.3.9.6 Socketed drilled shafts. Socketed drilled
shafts shall have a permanent pipe or tube casing that
extends down to bedrock and an uncased socket drilled
into the bedrock, both filled with concrete. Socketed
drilled shafts shall have reinforcement or a structural
steel core for the length as indicated by an approved
method of analysis.

The depth of the rock socket shall be sufficient to
develop the full load-bearing capacity of the element
with a minimum safety factor of two, but the depth shall
not be less than the outside diameter of the pipe or tube
casing. The design of the rock socket is permitted to be
predicated on the sum of the allowable load-bearing

412

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009pg411-415.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:42:18 PM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

pressure on the bottom of the socket plus bond along the
sides of the socket.
Where a structural steel core is used, the gross
cross-sectional area of the core shall not exceed 25 per-
cent of the gross area of the drilled shaft.
1810.3.10 Micropiles. Micropiles shall be designed and
detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.10.1 through
1810.3.10.4.
1810.3.10.1 Construction. Micropiles shall develop
their load-carrying capacity by means of a bond zone in
soil, bedrock or a combination of soil and bedrock.
Micropiles shall be grouted and have either a steel pipe or
tube or steel reinforcement at every section along the
length. It shall be permitted to transition from deformed
reinforcing bars to steel pipe or tube reinforcement by
extending the bars into the pipe or tube section by at least
their development length in tension in accordance with
ACI 318.
1810.3.10.2 Materials. Reinforcement shall consist of
deformed reinforcing bars in accordance with ASTM A
615 Grade 60 or 75 or ASTM A 722 Grade 150.
The steel pipe or tube shall have a minimum wall
thickness of 3/16 inch (4.8 mm). Splices shall comply with
Section 1810.3.6. The steel pipe or tube shall have a min-
imum yield strength of 45,000 psi (310 MPa) and a mini-
mum e longa tion of 15 percen t as shown by m ill
certifications or two coupon test samples per 40,000
pounds (18 160 kg) of pipe or tube.
1810.3.10.3 Reinforcement. For micropiles or portions
thereof grouted inside a temporary or permanent casing
or inside a hole drilled into bedrock or a hole drilled with
grout, the steel pipe or tube or steel reinforcement shall
be designed to carry at least 40 percent of the design
comp ress ion load . M icrop i les o r po r t ions thereo f
grouted in an open hole in soil without temporary or per-
manent casing and without suitable means of verifying
the hole diameter during grouting shall be designed to
carry the entire compression load in the reinforcing steel.
Where a steel pipe or tube is used for reinforcement, the
portion of the grout enclosed within the pipe is permitted
to be included in the determination of the allowable
stress in the grout.
1810.3.10.4 Seismic reinforcement. For structures
assigned to Seismic Design Category C, a permanent
steel casing shall be provided from the top of the
micropile down to the point of zero curvature. For struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the
micropile shall be considered as an alternative system in
accordance with Section 104.11. The alternative system
design, supporting documentation and test data shall be
subm i t ted to the bu i ld ing o ffic ia l for rev iew and
approval.
1810.3.11 Pile caps. Pile caps shall be of reinforced con-
crete, and shall include all elements to which vertical deep
foundation elements are connected, including grade beams
and mats. The soil immediately below the pile cap shall not
be considered as carrying any vertical load. The tops of ver-

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

tical deep foundation elements shall be embedded not less
than 3 inches (76 mm) into pile caps and the caps shall
extend at least 4 inches (102 mm) beyond the edges of the
elements. The tops of elements shall be cut or chipped back
to sound material before capping.
1810.3.11.1 Seismic Design Categories C through F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D,
E or F in accordance with Section 1613, concrete deep
foundation elements shall be connected to the pile cap by
embedding the element reinforcement or field-placed
dowels anchored in the element into the pile cap for a dis-
tance equal to their development length in accordance
with ACI 318. It shall be permitted to connect precast
prestressed piles to the pile cap by developing the ele-
ment prestressing strands into the pile cap provided the
connection is ductile. For deformed bars, the develop-
ment length is the full development length for compres-
sion, or tension in the case of uplift, without reduction for
excess reinforcement in accordance with Section 12.2.5
of ACI 318. Alternative measures for laterally confining
concrete and maintaining toughness and ductile-like
behavior at the top of the element shall be permitted pro-
vided the design is such that any hinging occurs in the
confined region.
The minimum transverse steel ratio for confinement
shall not be less than one-half of that required for col-
umns.
For resistance to uplift forces, anchorage of steel
pipes, tubes or H-piles to the pile cap shall be made by
means other than concrete bond to the bare steel section.
Concrete-filled steel pipes or tubes shall have reinforce-
ment of not less than 0.01 times the cross-sectional area
of the concrete fill developed into the cap and extending
into the fill a length equal to two times the required cap
embedment, but not less than the development length in
tension of the reinforcement.
1810.3.11.2 Seismic Design Categories D through F.
For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E
or F in accordance with Section 1613, deep foundation
element resistance to uplift forces or rotational restraint
shall be provided by anchorage into the pile cap,
designed considering the combined effect of axial forces
due to uplift and bending moments due to fixity to the
pile cap. Anchorage shall develop a minimum of 25 per-
cent of the strength of the element in tension. Anchorage
into the pile cap shall be capable of developing the fol-
lowing:
1. In the case of uplift, the least of the following:
nominal tensile strength of the longitudinal rein-
forcement in a concrete element; the nominal ten-
sile strength of a steel element; the frictional force
developed between the element and the soil multi-
plied by 1.3; and the axial tension force resulting
from the load combinations with overstrength fac-
tor in Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7.
2. In the case of rotational restraint, the lesser of the
following: the axial force, shear forces and bend-
ing moments resulting from the load combinations

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

413

18_ibc_2009pg411-415.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:42:19 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

with overstrength factor in Section 12.4.3.2 of
ASCE 7 or development of the full axial, bending
and shear nominal strength of the element.
Where the vertical lateral-force-resisting elements are
columns, the pile cap flexural strengths shall exceed the
column flexural strength. The connection between batter
piles and pile caps shall be designed to resist the nominal
strength of the pile acting as a short column. Batter piles
and their connection shall be capable of resisting forces
a n d m om e n t s f r om t h e l o a d c om b i n a t i o n s w i t h
overstrength factor in Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7.
1810.3.12 Grade beams. For structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category D, E or F in accordance with Section 1613,
grade beams shall comply with the provisions in Section
21.12.3 of ACI 318 for grade beams, except where they have
the capacity to resist the forces from the load combinations
with overstrength factor in Section 12.4.3.2 of ASCE 7.
1810.3.13 Seismic ties. For structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C, D, E or F in accordance with Section
1613, individual deep foundations shall be interconnected
by ties. Unless it can be demonstrated that equivalent
restraint is provided by reinforced concrete beams within
slabs on grade or reinforced concrete slabs on grade or con-
finement by competent rock, hard cohesive soils or very
dense granular soils, ties shall be capable of carrying, in ten-
sion or compression, a force equal to the lesser of the prod-
uct of the larger pile cap or column design gravity load times
the seismic coefficient, SDS, divided by 10, and 25 percent of
the smaller pile or column design gravity load.
Excep t ion : In G roup R-3 and U occupanc ies o f
light-frame construction, deep foundation elements sup-
porting foundation walls, isolated interior posts detailed
so the element is not subject to lateral loads or exterior
decks and patios are not subject to interconnection where
the soils are of adequate stiffness, subject to the approval
of the building official.
1810.4 Installation. Deep foundations shall be installed in
accordance with Section 1810.4. Where a single deep founda-
tion element comprises two or more sections of different mate-
rials or different types spliced together, each section shall
satisfy the applicable conditions of installation.
1810.4.1 Structural integrity. Deep foundation elements
shall be installed in such a manner and sequence as to pre-
vent distortion or damage that may adversely affect the
structural integrity of adjacent structures or of foundation
elements being installed or already in place and as to avoid
compacting the surrounding soil to the extent that other
foundation elements cannot be installed properly.
1810.4.1.1 Compressive strength of precast concrete
piles. A precast concrete pile shall not be driven before the
concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least 75
percent of the specified compressive strength (f ¢c), but not
less than the strength sufficient to withstand handling and
driving forces.
1810.4.1.2 Casing. Where cast-in-place deep founda-
tion elements are formed through unstable soils and con-
crete is placed in an open-drilled hole, a casing shall be

414

inserted in the hole prior to placing the concrete. Where
the casing is withdrawn during concreting, the level of
concrete shall be maintained above the bottom of the cas-
ing at a sufficient height to offset any hydrostatic or lat-
eral soil pressure. Driven casings shall be mandrel driven
their full length in contact with the surrounding soil.
1810.4.1.3 Driving near uncased concrete. Deep foun-
dation elements shall not be driven within six element
diameters center to center in granular soils or within
one-half the element length in cohesive soils of an
uncased element filled with concrete less than 48 hours
old unless approved by the building official. If the con-
crete surface in any completed element rises or drops, the
element shall be replaced. Driven uncased deep founda-
tion elements shall not be installed in soils that could
cause heave.
1810.4.1.4 Driving near cased concrete. Deep founda-
tion elements shall not be driven within four and one-half
average diameters of a cased element filled with concrete
less than 24 hours old unless approved by the building
official. Concrete shall not be placed in casings within
heave range of driving.
1810.4.1.5 Defective timber piles. Any substantial sud-
den increase in rate of penetration of a timber pile shall
be investigated for possible damage. If the sudden
increase in rate of penetration cannot be correlated to soil
strata, the pile shall be removed for inspection or
rejected.
1810.4.2 Identification. Deep foundation materials shall be
identified for conformity to the specified grade with this
identity maintained continuously from the point of manu-
facture to the point of installation or shall be tested by an
approved agency to determine conformity to the specified
grade. The approved agency shall furnish an affidavit of
compliance to the building official.
1810.4.3 Location plan. A plan showing the location and
designation of deep foundation elements by an identifica-
tion system shall be filed with the building official prior to
installation of such elements. Detailed records for elements
shall bear an identification corresponding to that shown on
the plan.
1810.4.4 Preexcavation. The use of jetting, augering or
other methods of preexcavation shall be subject to the
approval of
the building official. Where permitted,
preexcavation shall be carried out in the same manner as
used for deep foundation elements subject to load tests and
in such a manner that will not impair the carrying capacity of
the elements already in place or damage adjacent structures.
Element tips shall be driven below the preexcavated depth
until the required resistance or penetration is obtained.
1810.4.5 Vibratory driving. Vibratory drivers shall only be
used to install deep foundation elements where the element
load capacity is verified by load tests in accordance with
Section 1810.3.3.1.2. The installation of production ele-
ments shall be controlled according to power consumption,
rate of penetration or other approved means that ensure ele-
ment capacities equal or exceed those of the test elements.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009pg411-415.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:42:19 PM

28

SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS

top of the element to ensure that the grout completely
fills the drill hole. During withdrawal of the casing,
the grout level inside the casing shall be monitored to
verify that the flow of grout inside the casing is not
obstructed.
2. For a micropile or portion thereof grouted in an open
drill hole in soil without temporary casing, the mini-
mum design diameter of the drill hole shall be verified
by a suitable device during grouting.
3. For micropiles designed for end bearing, a suitable
means shall be employed to verify that the bearing
surface is properly cleaned prior to grouting.
4. Subsequent micropiles shall not be drilled near ele-
ments that have been grouted until the grout has had
sufficient time to harden.
5. Micropiles shall be grouted as soon as possible after
drilling is completed.
6. For micropiles designed with a full-length casing, the
casing shall be pulled back to the top of the bond zone
a n d r e i n s e r t e d o r s om e o t h e r s u i t a b l e m e a n s
employed to assure grout coverage outside the casing.
1810.4.11 Helical piles. Helical piles shall be installed to
specified embedment depth and torsional resistance criteria
as determined by a registered design professional. The
torque applied during installation shall not exceed the maxi-
mum allowable installation torque of the helical pile.
1810.4.12 Special inspection. Special inspections in accor-
dance with Sections 1704.8 and 1704.9 shall be provided
for driven and cast-in-place deep foundation elements,
respectively. Special inspections in accordance with Section
1704.10 shall be provided for helical piles.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1810.4.6 Heaved elements. Deep foundation elements that
have heaved during the driving of adjacent elements shall be
redriven as necessary to develop the required capacity and
penetration, or the capacity of the element shall be verified
by load tests in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2.
1810.4.7 Enlarged base cast-in-place elements. Enlarged
bases for cast-in-place deep foundation elements formed by
compacting concrete or by driving a precast base shall be
formed in or driven into granular soils. Such elements shall
be constructed in the same manner as successful prototype
test elements driven for the project. Shafts extending
through peat or other organic soil shall be encased in a per-
manent steel casing. Where a cased shaft is used, the shaft
shall be adequately reinforced to resist column action or the
annular space around the shaft shall be filled sufficiently to
reestablish lateral support by the soil. Where heave occurs,
the element shall be replaced unless it is demonstrated that
the element is undamaged and capable of carrying twice its
design load.
1810.4.8 Hollow-stem augered, cast-in-place elements.
Where concrete or grout is placed by pumping through a
hollow-stem auger, the auger shall be permitted to rotate in a
clockwise direction during withdrawal. As the auger is
withdrawn at a steady rate or in increments not to exceed 1
foot (305 mm), concreting or grouting pumping pressures
shall be measured and maintained high enough at all times
to offset hydrostatic and lateral earth pressures. Concrete or
grout volumes shall be measured to ensure that the volume
of concrete or grout placed in each element is equal to or
greater than the theoretical volume of the hole created by the
auger. Where the installation process of any element is inter-
rupted or a loss of concreting or grouting pressure occurs,
the element shall be redrilled to 5 feet (1524 mm) below the
elevation of the tip of the auger when the installation was
interrupted or concrete or grout pressure was lost and
reformed. Augered cast-in-place elements shall not be
installed within six diameters center to center of an element
filled with concrete or grout less than 12 hours old, unless
approved by the building official. If the concrete or grout
level in any completed element drops due to installation of
an adjacent element, the element shall be replaced.
1810.4.9 Socketed drilled shafts. The rock socket and pipe
or tube casing of socketed drilled shafts shall be thoroughly
cleaned of foreign materials before filling with concrete.
Steel cores shall be bedded in cement grout at the base of the
rock socket.
1810.4.10 Micropiles. Micropile deep foundation elements
shall be permitted to be formed in holes advanced by rotary
or percussive drilling methods, with or without casing. The
elements shall be grouted with a fluid cement grout. The
grout shall be pumped through a tremie pipe extending to
the bottom of the element until grout of suitable quality
returns at the top of the element. The following require-
ments apply to specific installation methods:
1. For micropiles grouted inside a temporary casing, the
reinforcing bars shall be inserted prior to withdrawal
of the casing. The casing shall be withdrawn in a con-
trolled manner with the grout level maintained at the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

415

18_ibc_2009pg411-415.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:42:20 PM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

416

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

18_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:53:02 AM

30

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 19

CONCRETE

Italics are used for text within Sections 1903 through 1908 of this code to indicate provisions that differ from ACI 318.

SECTION 1901
GENERAL

SECTION 1902
DEFINITIONS

1901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
materials, quality control, design and construction of concrete
used in structures.
1901.2 Plain and reinforced concrete. Structural concrete
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and ACI 318 as amended in Sec-
tion 1908 of this code. Except for the provisions of Sections
1904 and 1910, the design and construction of slabs on grade
shall not be governed by this chapter unless they transmit verti-
cal loads or lateral forces from other parts of the structure to the
soil.
1901.3 Source and applicability. The format and subject mat-
ter of Sections 1902 through 1907 of this chapter are patterned
after, and in general conformity with, the provisions for struc-
tural concrete in ACI 318.
1901.4 Construction documents. The construction docu-
ments for structural concrete construction shall include:
1. The specified compressive strength of concrete at the
stated ages or stages of construction for which each
concrete element is designed.
2. The specified strength or grade of reinforcement.
3. The size and location of structural elements, reinforce-
ment and anchors.
4. Provision for dimensional changes resulting from
creep, shrinkage and temperature.
5. The magnitude and location of prestressing forces.
6. Anchorage length of reinforcement and location and
length of lap splices.
7. Type and location of mechanical and welded splices of
reinforcement.
8. Details and location of contraction or isolation joints
specified for plain concrete.
9. Minimum concrete compressive strength at time of
posttensioning.
10. Stressing sequence for posttensioning tendons.
11. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D,
E or F, a statement if slab on grade is designed as a
structural diaphragm (see Section 21.12.3.4 of ACI
318).
1901.5 Special inspection. The special inspection of concrete
elements of buildings and structures and concreting operations
shall be as required by Chapter 17.

1902.1 General. The words and terms defined in ACI 318
shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in
this code for concrete construction, have the meanings shown
in ACI 318 as modified by Section 1908.1.1.

SECTION 1903
SPECIFICATIONS FOR TESTS AND MATERIALS

1903.1 General. Materials used to produce concrete, concrete
itself and testing thereof shall comply with the applicable stan-
dards listed in ACI 318. Where required, special inspections
and tests shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.

1903.2 Glass fiber reinforced concrete. Glass fiber rein-

forced concrete (GFRC) and the materials used in such con-
crete shall be in accordance with the PCI MNL 128 standard.

SECTION 1904
DURABILITY REQUIREMENTS
1904.1 Water-cementitious materials ratio. Where maximum
water-cementitious materials ratios are specified in ACI 318,
they shall be calculated in accordance with ACI 318, Section 4.1.
1904.2 Exposure categories and classes. Concrete shall be
assigned to exposure classes in accordance with ACI 318, Sec-
tion 4.2, based on:
1. Exposure to freezing and thawing in a moist condition or
deicer chemicals;
2. Exposure to sulfates in water or soil;
3. Exposure to water where the concrete is intended to have
low permeability; and
4. Exposure to chlorides from deicing chemicals, salt,
saltwater, brackish water, seawater or spray from these
sources, where the concrete has steel reinforcement.
1904.3 Concrete properties. Concrete mixtures shall conform
to the most restrictive maximum water-cementitious materials
ratios and minimum specified concrete compressive strength
requirements of ACI 318, Section 4.3, based on the exposure
classes assigned in Section 1904.2.
Exception: For occupancies and appurtenances thereto in
Group R occupancies that are in buildings less than four
stories above grade plane, normal-weight aggregate con-
crete is permitted to comply with the requirements of Table
1904.3 based on the weathering classification (freezing and
thawing) determined from Figure 1904.3 in lieu of the
requirements of ACI 318, Table 4.3.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

417

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:13 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONCRETE

TABLE 1904.3
MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (f ¢c)

TYPE OR LOCATION OF CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION

Negligible exposure

Moderate exposure

Severe exposure

MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (f ¢cat 28 days, psi)

Basement wallsc and foundations not exposed to the weather

Basement slabs and interior slabs on grade, except garage floor
slabs

Basement wallsc, foundation walls, exterior walls and other
vertical concrete surfaces exposed to the weather

Driveways, curbs, walks, patios, porches, carport slabs, steps and
other flatwork exposed to the weather, and garage floor slabs

2,500

2,500

2,500

2,500

2,500

2,500

3,000b

2,500a

2,500a

3,000b

3,000b, d

3,500b, d

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.
a. Concrete in these locations that can be subjected to freezing and thawing during construction shall be of air-entrained concrete in accordance with Section
1904.2.1.
b. Concrete shall be air entrained in accordance with Section 1904.4.1.
c. Structural plain concrete basement walls are exempt from the requirements for exposure conditions of Section 1904.3 (see Section 1909.6.1).
d. For garage floor slabs where a steel trowel finish is used, the total air content required by Section 1904.4.1 is permitted to be reduced to not less than 3 percent, pro-
vided the minimum specified compressive strength of the concrete is increased to 4,000 psi.

FIGURE 1904.3
WEATHERING PROBABILITY MAP FOR CONCRETEa, b, c

a. Lines defining areas are approximate only. Local areas can be more or less severe than indicated by the region classification.
b. A “severe” classification is where weather conditions encourage or require the use of deicing chemicals or where there is potential for a continuous presence of
moisture during frequent cycles of freezing and thawing. A “moderate” classification is where weather conditions occasionally expose concrete in the presence of
moisture to freezing and thawing, but where deicing chemicals are not generally used. A “negligible” classification is where weather conditions rarely expose con-
crete in the presence of moisture to freezing and thawing.
c. Alaska and Hawaii are classified as severe and negligible, respectively.

418

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:16 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

1904.4 Freezing and thawing exposures. Concrete that will
be exposed to freezing and thawing, in the presence of mois-
ture, with or without deicing chemicals being present, shall
comply with Sections 1904.4.1 and 1904.4.2.
1904.4.1 Air entrainment. Concrete exposed to freezing
and thawing while moist shall be air entrained in accordance
with ACI 318, Section 4.4.1.
1904.4.2 Deicing chemicals. For concrete exposed to freez-
ing and thawing in the presence of moisture and deicing
chemicals, the maximum weight of fly ash, other pozzolans,
silica fume or slag that is included in the concrete shall not
exceed the percentages of the total weight of cementitious
materials permitted by ACI 318, Section 4.4.2.
1904.5 Alternative cementitious materials for sulfate expo-
sure. Alternative combinations of cementitious materials for
use in sulfate-resistant concrete to those listed in ACI 318,
Table 4.3.1 shall be permitted in accordance with ACI 318,
Section 4.5.1.

➡

➡

SECTION 1905
CONCRETE QUALITY, MIXING AND PLACING

1905.1 General. The required strength and durability of con-
crete shall be determined by compliance with the proportion-
ing, testing, mixing and placing provisions of Sections
1905.1.1 through 1905.13.
1905.1.1 Strength. Concrete shall be proportioned to pro-
vide an average compressive strength as prescribed in Sec-
tion 1905.3 and shall satisfy the durability criteria of
Section 1904. Concrete shall be produced to minimize the
frequency of strengths below f ¢c as prescribed in Section
1905.6.3. For concrete designed and constructed in accor-
dance with this chapter, f ¢c shall not be less than 2,500 psi
(17.22 MPa). No maximum specified compressive strength
shall apply unless restricted by a specific provision of this
code or ACI 318.
1905.2 Selection of concrete proportions. Concrete propor-
tions shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of
ACI 318, Section 5.2.
1905.3 Proportioning on the basis of field experience
and/or trial mixtures. Concrete proportioning determined on
the basis of field experience and/or trial mixtures shall be done
in accordance with ACI 318, Section 5.3.
1905.4 Proportioning without field experience or trial mix-
tures. Concrete proportioning determined without field expe-
rience or trial mixtures shall be done in accordance with ACI
318, Section 5.4.
1905.5 Average strength reduction. As data become avail-
able during construction, it is permissible to reduce the amount
by which the average compressive strength (f ¢c) is required to
exceed the specified value of f ¢c in accordance with ACI 318,
Section 5.5.

CONCRETE

1905.6 Evaluation and acceptance of concrete. The criteria
for evaluation and acceptance of concrete shall be as specified
in Sections 1905.6.2 through 1905.6.5.
1905.6.1 Qualified technicians. Concrete shall be tested in
accordance with the requirements in Sections 1905.6.2
through 1905.6.5. Qualified field testing technicians shall
perform tests on fresh concrete at the job site, prepare speci-
mens required for curing under field conditions, prepare
specimens required for testing in the laboratory and record
the temperature of the fresh concrete when preparing speci-
mens for strength tests. Qualified laboratory technicians
shall perform all required laboratory tests.
1905.6.2 Frequency of testing. The frequency of conduct-
ing strength tests of concrete and the minimum number of
tests shall be as specified in ACI 318, Section 5.6.2.
Exception: When the total volume of a given class of
concrete is less than 50 cubic yards (38 m3), strength tests
are not required when evidence of satisfactory strength is
submitted to and approved by the building official.
1905.6.3 Strength test specimens. Specimens prepared for
acceptance testing of concrete in accordance with Section
1905.6.2 and strength test acceptance criteria shall comply
with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 5.6.3.
1905.6.4 Field-cured specimens. Where required by the
building official to determine adequacy of curing and pro-
tection of concrete in the structure, specimens shall be pre-
pared, cured, tested and test results evaluated for acceptance
in accordance with ACI 318, Section 5.6.4.
1905.6.5 Low-strength test results. Where any strength
test (see ACI 318, Section 5.6.2.4) falls below the specified
value of f ¢c, the provisions of ACI 318, Section 5.6.5, shall
apply.
1905.7 Preparation of equipment and place of deposit. Prior
to concrete being placed, the space to receive the concrete and
the equipment used to deposit it shall comply with ACI 318,
Section 5.7.
1905.8 Mixing. Mixing of concrete shall be performed in
accordance with ACI 318, Section 5.8.
1905.9 Conveying. The method and equipment for conveying
concrete to the place of deposit shall comply with ACI 318,
Section 5.9.
1905.10 Depositing. The depositing of concrete shall comply
with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 5.10.
1905.11 Curing. The length of time, temperature and moisture
conditions for curing of concrete shall be in accordance with
ACI 318, Section 5.11.
1905.12 Cold weather requirements. Concrete to be placed
during freezing or near-freezing weather shall comply with the
requirements of ACI 318, Section 5.12.
1905.13 Hot weather requirements. Concrete to be placed
during hot weather shall comply with the requirements of ACI
318, Section 5.13.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

419

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:16 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONCRETE

SECTION 1906
FORMWORK, EMBEDDED PIPES AND
CONSTRUCTION JOINTS

1906.1 Formwork. The design, fabrication and erection of
forms shall comply with ACI 318, Section 6.1.
1906.2 Removal of forms, shores and reshores. The removal
of forms and shores, including from slabs and beams (except
where cast on the ground), and the installation of reshores shall
comply with ACI 318, Section 6.2.
1906.3 Conduits and pipes embedded in concrete. Conduits,
pipes and sleeves of any material not harmful to concrete and
within the limitations of ACI 318, Section 6.3, are permitted to
be embedded in concrete with approval of the registered design
professional.
1906.4 Construction joints. Construction joints, including
their location, shall comply with the provisions of ACI 318,
Section 6.4.

SECTION 1907
DETAILS OF REINFORCEMENT

1907.1 Hooks. Standard hooks on reinforcing bars used in
concrete construction shall comply with ACI 318, Section 7.1.
1907.2 Minimum bend diameters. Minimum reinforcement
bend diameters utilized in concrete construction shall comply
with ACI 318, Section 7.2.
1907.3 Bending. The bending of reinforcement shall comply
with ACI 318, Section 7.3.
1907.4 Surface conditions of reinforcement. The surface
conditions of reinforcement shall comply with the provisions
of ACI 318, Section 7.4.
1907.5 Placing reinforcement. The placement of reinforce-
ment, including tolerances on depth and cover, shall comply
with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 7.5. Reinforcement
shall be accurately placed and adequately supported before
concrete is placed.
1907.6 Spacing limits for reinforcement. The clear distance
between reinforcing bars, bundled bars, tendons and ducts
shall comply with ACI 318, Section 7.6.
1907.7 Concrete protection for reinforcement. The mini-
mum specified concrete cover for reinforcement shall comply
with Sections 1907.7.1 through 1907.7.8.
1907.7.1 Cast-in-place concrete (nonprestressed). Mini-
mum specified concrete cover shall be provided for rein-
forcement
in nonprestressed,
cast-in-place
concrete
construction in accordance with ACI 318, Section 7.7.1.
1907.7.2 Cast-in-place concrete (prestressed). The mini-
mum specified concrete cover
for prestressed and
nonprestressed reinforcement, ducts and end fittings in
cast-in-place prestressed concrete shall comply with ACI
318, Section 7.7.2.
1907.7.3 Precast concrete (manufactured under plant
control conditions). The minimum specified concrete
cover for prestressed and nonprestressed reinforcement,
ducts and end fittings in precast concrete manufactured

under plant control conditions shall comply with ACI 318,
Section 7.7.3.

1907.7.4 Bundled bars. The minimum specified concrete
cover for bundled bars shall comply with ACI 318, Section
7.7.4.

1907.7.5 Headed shear stud reinforcement. For headed
shear stud reinforcement, the minimum specified concrete
cover shall comply with ACI 318, Section 7.7.5.

1907.7.6 Corrosive environments. In corrosive environ-
ments or other severe exposure conditions, prestressed and
nonprestressed reinforcement shall be provided with addi-
tional protection in accordance with ACI 318, Section 7.7.6.

1907.7.7 Future extensions. Exposed reinforcement,
inserts and plates intended for bonding with future exten-
sions shall be protected from corrosion.

1907.7.8 Fire protection. When this code requires a thick-
ness of cover for fire protection greater than the minimum
concrete cover in Section 1907.7, such greater thickness
shall be specified.

1907.8 Special reinforcement details for columns. Offset
bent longitudinal bars in columns and load transfer in structural
steel cores of composite compression members shall comply
with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 7.8.

1907.9 Connections. Connections between concrete framing
members shall comply with the provisions of ACI 318, Section
7.9.

1907.10 Lateral reinforcement for compression members.
Lateral reinforcement for concrete compression members shall
comply with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 7.10.

1907.11 Lateral reinforcement for flexural members. Lat-
eral reinforcement for compression reinforcement in concrete
flexural members shall comply with the provisions of ACI 318,
Section 7.11.

1907.12 Shrinkage and temperature reinforcement. Rein-
forcement for shrinkage and temperature stresses in concrete
members shall comply with the provisions of ACI 318, Section
7.12.

1907.13 Requirements for structural integrity. The detail-
ing of reinforcement and connections between concrete mem-
bers shall comply with the provisions of ACI 318, Section 7.13,
to improve structural integrity.

SECTION 1908
MODIFICATIONS TO ACI 318

1908.1 General. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indi-
cated in Sections 1908.1.1 through 1908.1.10.

1908.1.1 ACI 318, Section 2.2. Modify existing definitions
and add the following definitions to ACI 318, Section 2.2.

DESIGN DISPLACEMENT. Total lateral displacement
expected for the design-basis earthquake, as specified by
Section 12.8.6 of ASCE 7.

➡

420

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:17 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL.
A wall complying with the requirements of Chapter 22,
including 22.6.7.
ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. A precast
wall complying with the requirements of Chapters 1 through
18.

ORDINARY REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUC-
TURAL WALL. A cast-in-place wall complying with the
requirements of Chapters 1 through 18.
ORDINARY STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE
WALL. A wall complying with the requirements of Chapter
22, excluding 22.6.7.

SPECIAL STRUCTURAL WALL. A cast-in-place or
precast wall complying with the requirements of 21.1.3
through 21.1.7, 21.9 and 21.10, as applicable, in addition to
the requirements for ordinary reinforced concrete structural
walls or ordinary precast structural walls, as applicable.
Where ASCE 7 refers to a “special reinforced concrete
structural wall,” it shall be deemed to mean a “special
structural wall.”
WALL PIER. A wall segment with a horizontal length-
to-thickness ratio of at least 2.5, but not exceeding 6, whose
clear height is at least two times its horizontal length.

1908.1.2 ACI 318, Section 21.1.1. Modify ACI 318 Sec-
tions 21.1.1.3 and 21.1.1.7 to read as follows:
21.1.1.3 – Structures assigned to Seismic Design Cate-
gory A shall satisfy requirements of Chapters 1 to 19 and
22; Chapter 21 does not apply. Structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category B, C, D, E or F also shall satisfy
21.1.1.4 through 21.1.1.8, as applicable. Except for
structural elements of plain concrete complying with
Section 1908.1.8 of the International Building Code,
structural elements of plain concrete are prohibited in
structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E
or F.
21.1.1.7 – Structural systems designated as part of the
seismic-force-resisting system shall be restricted to
those permitted by ASCE 7. Except for Seismic Design
Category A, for which Chapter 21 does not apply, the fol-
lowing provisions shall be satisfied for each structural
system designated as part of the seismic-force-resisting
system, regardless of the Seismic Design Category:
(a) Ordinary moment frames shall satisfy 21.2.
(b) Ordinary reinforced concrete structural walls
and ordinary precast structural walls need not
satisfy any provisions in Chapter 21.
(c)
Intermediate moment frames shall satisfy 21.3.
(d) Intermediate precast structural walls shall satisfy
21.4.
(e) Sp e c ia l mom en t f r am e s sh a l l s a t i s fy 21 .5
through 21.8.
(f) Special structural walls shall satisfy 21.9.

CONCRETE

➡

(g) Special structural walls constructed using pre-
cast concrete shall satisfy 21.10.
All special moment frames and special structural
walls shall also satisfy 21.1.3 through 21.1.7.
1908.1.3 ACI 318, Section 21.4. Modify ACI 318, Section
21.4, by renumbering Section 21.4.3 to become 21.4.4 and
adding new Sections 21.4.3, 21.4.5 and 21.4.6 to read as fol-
lows:
21.4.3 – Connections that are designed to yield shall be
capable of maintaining 80 percent of their design
strength at the deformation induced by the design dis-
placement or shall use Type 2 mechanical splices.
21.4.4 – Elements of the connection that are not designed
to yield shall develop at least 1.5 Sy.
21.4.5 – Wall piers not designed as part of a moment
frame shall have transverse reinforcement designed to
resist the shear forces determined from 21.3.3. Spacing
of transverse reinforcement shall not exceed 8 inches
(203 mm). Transverse reinforcement shall be extended
beyond the pier clear height for at least 12 inches (305
mm).
Exceptions:
1. Wall piers that satisfy 21.13.
2. Wall piers along a wall line within a story
where other shear wall segments provide lat-
eral support to the wall piers and such seg-
ments have a total stiffness of at least six times
the sum of the stiffnesses of all the wall piers.
21.4.6 – Wall segments with a horizontal length-to-thick-
ness ratio less than 2.5 shall be designed as columns.

1908.1.4 ACI 318, Section 21.9. Modify ACI 318, Section
21.9, by adding new Section 21.9.10 to read as follows:
21.9.10 – Wall piers and wall segments.
21.9.10.1 – Wall piers not designed as a part of a special
moment frame shall have transverse reinforcement
designed to satisfy the requirements in 21.9.10.2.
Exceptions:
1. Wall piers that satisfy 21.13.
2. Wall piers along a wall line within a story
where other shear wall segments provide lat-
eral support to the wall piers and such seg-
ments have a total stiffness of at least six times
the sum of the stiffnesses of all the wall piers.
21.9.10.2 – Transverse reinforcement with seismic hooks
at both ends shall be designed to resist the shear forces
determined from 21.6.5.1. Spacing of transverse rein-
forcement shall not exceed 6 inches (152 mm). Trans-
verse reinforcement shall be extended beyond the pier
clear height for at least 12 inches (305 mm).
21.9.10.3 – Wall segments with a horizontal length-to-
thickness ratio less than 2.5 shall be designed as col-
umns.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

421

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:17 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONCRETE

➡

1908.1.5 ACI 318, Section 21.10. Modify ACI 318, Section
21.10.2, to read as follows:
21.10.2 – Special structural walls constructed using pre-
cast concrete shall satisfy all the requirements of 21.9 for
cast-in-place special structural walls in addition to Sec-
tions 21.4.2 through 21.4.4.
1908.1.6 ACI 318, Section 21.12.1.1. Modify ACI 318,
Section 21.12.1.1, to read as follows:
21.12.1.1 – Foundations resisting earthquake-induced
forces or transferring earthquake-induced forces between
a structure and ground shall comply with the requirements
of Section 21.12 and other applicable provisions of ACI
318 unless modified by Chapter 18 of the International
Building Code.

1908.1.7 ACI 318, Section 22.6. Modify ACI 318, Section
22.6, by adding new Section 22.6.7 to read as follows:
22.6.7 – Detailed plain concrete structural walls.
22.6.7.1 – Detailed plain concrete structural walls are
walls conforming to the requirements of ordinary struc-
tural plain concrete walls and 22.6.7.2.
22.6.7.2 – Reinforcement shall be provided as follows:
(a) Vertical reinforcement of at least 0.20 square
inch (129 mm2) in cross-sectional area shall be
provided continuously from support to support at
each corner, at each side of each opening and at
the ends of walls. The continuous vertical bar
required beside an opening is permitted to sub-
stitute for one of the two No. 5 bars required by
22.6.6.5.
(b) Horizontal reinforcement at least 0.20 square
inch (129 mm2) in cross-sectional area shall be
provided:
1. Continuously at structurally connected roof
and floor levels and at the top of walls;
2. At the bottom of load-bearing walls or in the
top of foundations where doweled to the
wall; and
3. At a maximum spacing of 120 inches (3048
mm).
Reinforcement at the top and bottom of open-
ings, where used in determining the maximum
spacing specified in Item 3 above, shall be con-
tinuous in the wall.

1908.1.8 ACI 318, Section 22.10. Delete ACI 318, Section
22.10, and replace with the following:
22.10 – Plain concrete in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C, D, E or F.
22.10.1 – Structures assigned to Seismic Design Cate-
gory C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural
plain concrete, except as follows:
(a) Structural plain concrete basement, foundation
or other walls below the base are permitted in
detached one- and two-family dwellings three
s to r ie s o r le s s in h e igh t con s t ruc ted w i th

422

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:17 AM

6

stud-bearing walls. In dwellings assigned to
Seismic Design Category D or E, the height of the
wall shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 mm), the thick-
ness shall not be less than 71/2 inches (190 mm),
and the wall shall retain no more than 4 feet
(1219 mm) of unbalanced fill. Walls shall have
reinforcement in accordance with 22.6.6.5.
(b) Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting
pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the
projection of the footing beyond the face of the
supported member does not exceed the footing
thickness.
Exception: In detached one- and two-family
dwellings three stories or less in height, the pro-
jection of the footing beyond the face of the sup-
ported member is permitted to exceed the
footing thickness.
(c) Plain concrete footings supporting walls are per-
mitted, provided the footings have at least two
continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars
shall not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a
total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross
cross-sectional area of the footing. For footings
that exceed 8 inches (203 mm) in thickness, a min-
imum of one bar shall be provided at the top and
bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement
shall be provided at corners and intersections.
Exceptions:
1. In detached one- and two-family dwell-
ings three stories or less in height and
constructed with stud-bearing walls ,
plain concrete footings without longitu-
dinal reinforcement supporting walls are
permitted.
2. For foundation systems consisting of a
plain concrete footing and a plain con-
crete stemwall, a minimum of one bar
sha l l be p rov ided a t the top o f the
stemwall and at the bottom of the footing.
3. W h e r e a s l a b o n g r o u n d i s c a s t
monolithically with the footing, one No. 5
bar is permitted to be located at either the
top of the slab or bottom of the footing.

1908.1.9 ACI 318, Section D.3.3. Modify ACI 318, Sec-
tions D.3.3.4 and D.3.3.5 to read as follows:
D.3.3.4 – Anchors shall be designed to be governed by
the steel strength of a ductile steel element as determined
in accordance with D.5.1 and D.6.1, unless either
D.3.3.5 or D.3.3.6 is satisfied.
Exceptions:
1. Anchors in concrete designed to support non-
structural components in accordance with
ASCE 7 Section 13.4.2 need not satisfy Section
D.3.3.4.
2. Anchors designed to resist wall out-of-plane
forces with design strengths equal to or greater

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

than the force determined in accordance with
ASCE 7 Equation 12.11-1 or 12.14-10 need not
satisfy Section D.3.3.4.
D.3.3.5 – Instead of D.3.3.4, the attachment that the
anchor is connecting to the structure shall be designed so
that the attachment will undergo ductile yielding at a
force level corresponding to anchor forces no greater
than the design strength of anchors specified in D.3.3.3.
Exceptions:
1. Anchors in concre te des igned to suppor t
nonstructural components in accordance with
ASCE 7 Section 13.4.2 need not satisfy Section
D.3.3.5.
2. Anchors designed to resist wall out-of-plane
forces with design strengths equal to or greater
than the force determined in accordance with
ASCE 7 Equation 12.11-1 or 12.14-10 need not
satisfy Section D.3.3.5.

1908.1.10 ACI 318, Section D.4.2.2. Delete ACI 318, Sec-
tion D.4.2.2, and replace with the following:
D.4.2.2 – The concrete breakout strength requirements for
anchors in tension shall be considered satisfied by the
design procedure of D.5.2 provided Equation D-8 is not
used for anchor embedments exceeding 25 inches. The con-
crete breakout strength requirements for anchors in shear
with diameters not exceeding 2 inches shall be considered
satisfied by the design procedure of D.6.2. For anchors in
shear with diameters exceeding 2 inches, shear anchor rein-
forcement shall be provided in accordance with the proce-
dures of D.6.2.9.

SECTION 1909
STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE

1909.1 Scope. The design and construction of structural plain
concrete, both cast-in-place and precast, shall comply with the
minimum requirements of Section 1909 and ACI 318, Chapter
22, as modified in Section 1908.
1909.1.1 Special structures. For special structures, such as
arches, underground utility structures, gravity walls and
shielding walls, the provisions of this section shall govern
where applicable.
1909.2 Limitations. The use of structural plain concrete shall
be limited to:
1. Members that are continuously supported by soil, such
as walls and footings, or by other structural members
capable of providing continuous vertical support.
2. Members for which arch action provides compression
under all conditions of loading.
3. Walls and pedestals.
The use of structural plain concrete columns and structural
plain concrete footings on piles is not permitted. See Section

CONCRETE

1908.1.8 for additional limitations on the use of structural plain
concrete.
1909.3 Joints. Contraction or isolation joints shall be provided
to divide structural plain concrete members into flexurally dis-
continuous elements in accordance with ACI 318, Section 22.3.
1909.4 Design. Structural plain concrete walls, footings and
pedestals shall be designed for adequate strength in accordance
with ACI 318, Sections 22.4 through 22.8.
Exception: For Group R-3 occupancies and buildings of
other occupancies less than two stories above grade plane
of light-frame construction, the required edge thickness of
ACI 318 is permitted to be reduced to 6 inches (152 mm),
provided that the footing does not extend more than 4 inches
(102 mm) on either side of the supported wall.
1909.5 Precast members. The design, fabrication, transporta-
tion and erection of precast, structural plain concrete elements
shall be in accordance with ACI 318, Section 22.9.
1909.6 Walls. In addition to the requirements of this section,
structural plain concrete walls shall comply with the applicable
requirements of ACI 318, Chapter 22.
1909.6.1 Basement walls. The thickness of exterior base-
ment walls and foundation walls shall be not less than 71/2
inches (191 mm).
1909.6.2 Other walls. Except as provided for in Section
1909.6.1, the thickness of bearing walls shall be not less
than 1/24 the unsupported height or length, whichever is
shorter, but not less than 51/2 inches (140 mm).
1909.6.3 Openings in walls. Not less than one No. 5 bar
shall be provided around window, door and similar sized
openings. The bar shall be anchored to develop fy in tension
at the corners of openings.

SECTION 1910
MINIMUM SLAB PROVISIONS

1910.1 General. The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported
directly on the ground shall not be less than 31/2 inches (89 mm).
A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.15 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder with
joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed
between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab,
or other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used
to retard vapor transmission through the floor slab.
Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:
1. For detached structures accessory to occupancies in
Group R-3, such as garages, utility buildings or other
unheated facilities.
2. For unheated storage rooms having an area of less
than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to
occupancies in Group R-3.
3. For buildings of other occupancies where migration
of moisture through the slab from below will not be
detrimental to the intended occupancy of the building.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

423

19_ibc_2009pg423.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 2:11:43 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONCRETE

4. For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork
which will not be enclosed at a later date.
5. Where approved based on local site conditions.

SECTION 1911
ANCHORAGE TO CONCRETE—
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN

1911.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
allowable stress design of headed bolts and headed stud
anchors cast in normal-weight concrete for purposes of trans-
mitting structural loads from one connected element to the
other. These provisions do not apply to anchors installed in
hardened concrete or where load combinations include earth-
quake loads or effects. The bearing area of headed anchors
shall be not less than one and one-half times the shank area.
Where strength design is used, or where load combinations
include earthquake loads or effects, the design strength of
anchors shall be determined in accordance with Section 1912.
Bolts shall conform to ASTM A 307 or an approved equivalent.
1911.2 Allowable service load. The allowable service load for
headed anchors in shear or tension shall be as indicated in Table
1911.2. Where anchors are subject to combined shear and ten-
sion, the following relationship shall be satisfied:

(Ps / Pt )5/3 + (Vs / Vt ) 5/3 £ 1

(Equation 19-1)

where:
Ps
= Applied tension service load, pounds (N).
Pt
= Allowable tension service load from Table 1911.2,
pounds (N).
= Applied shear service load, pounds (N).
= Allowable shear service load from Table 1911.2,
pounds (N).

Vs
Vt

1911.3 Required edge distance and spacing. The allowable
service loads in tension and shear specified in Table 1911.2 are
for the edge distance and spacing specified. The edge distance
and spacing are permitted to be reduced to 50 percent of the val-
ues specified with an equal reduction in allowable service load.
Where edge distance and spacing are reduced less than 50 per-
cent, the allowable service load shall be determined by linear
interpolation.

1911.4 Increase in allowable load. Increase of the values in
Table 1911.2 by one-third is permitted where the provisions of
Section 1605.3.2 permit an increase in allowable stress for
wind loading.

1911.5 Increase for special inspection. Where special inspec-
tion is provided for the installation of anchors, a 100-percent
increase in the allowable tension values of Table 1911.2 is per-
mitted. No increase in shear value is permitted.

SECTION 1912
ANCHORAGE TO CONCRETE—
STRENGTH DESIGN

1912.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
strength design of anchors installed in concrete for purposes of
transmitting structural loads from one connected element to the
other. Headed bolts, headed studs and hooked (J- or L-) bolts cast
in concrete and expansion anchors and undercut anchors installed
in hardened concrete shall be designed in accordance with Appen-
dix D of ACI 318 as modified by Sections 1908.1.9 and
1908.1.10, provided they are within the scope of Appendix D.

The strength design of anchors that are not within the scope
of Appendix D of ACI 318, and as amended in Sections
1908.1.9 and 1908.1.10, shall be in accordance with an
approved procedure.

➡

TABLE 1911.2
ALLOWABLE SERVICE LOAD ON EMBEDDED BOLTS (pounds)

MINIMUM CONCRETE STRENGTH (psi)

BOLT
DIAMETER
(inches)

MINIMUM
EMBEDMENT
(inches)

EDGE
DISTANCE
(inches)

SPACING
(inches)

f ¢c = 2,500
Tension
Shear

f ¢c = 3,000
Tension
Shear

f ¢c = 4,000
Tension
Shear

1/4
3/8

1/2

5/8

3/4

7/8

1
11/8
11/4

21/2
3

4
4
41/2
41/2
5
5

6

7

8

9

11/2
21/4
3
5
33/4
61/4
41/2
71/2
51/4
6
63/4
71/2

3
41/2
6
6
71/2
71/2
9
9
101/2
12
131/2
15

200

500

950
1,450

1,500
2,125

2,250
2,825

2,550

3,050

3,400

4,000

500

1,100

1,250
1,600

2,750
2,950

3,250
4,275

3,700

4,125

4,750

5,800

200

500

950
1,500

1,500
2,200

2,250
2,950

2,550

3,250

3,400

4,000

500

1,100

1,250
1,650

2,750
3,000

3,560
4,300

4,050

4,500

4,750

5,800

200

500

950
1,550

1,500
2,400

2,250
3,200

2,550

3,650

3,400

4,000

500

1,100

1,250
1,750

2,750
3,050

3,560
4,400

4,050

5,300

4,750

5,800

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa, 1 pound = 4.45 N.

424

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:18 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 1913
SHOTCRETE

1913.1 General. Shotcrete is mortar or concrete that is pneu-
matically projected at high velocity onto a surface. Except as
specified in this section, shotcrete shall conform to the require-
ments of this chapter for plain or reinforced concrete.
1913.2 Proportions and materials. Shotcrete proportions
shall be selected that allow suitable placement procedures
using the delivery equipment selected and shall result in fin-
ished in-place hardened shotcrete meeting the strength require-
ments of this code.
1913.3 Aggregate. Coarse aggregate, if used, shall not exceed
3/4 inch (19.1 mm).
1913.4 Reinforcement. Reinforcement used in shotcrete con-
struction shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1913.4.1
through 1913.4.4.
1913.4.1 Size. The maximum size of reinforcement shall be
No. 5 bars unless it is demonstrated by preconstruction tests
that adequate encasement of larger bars will be achieved.
1913.4.2 Clearance. When No. 5 or smaller bars are used,
there shall be a minimum clearance between parallel rein-
forcement bars of 21/2 inches (64 mm). When bars larger
than No. 5 are permitted, there shall be a minimum clear-
ance between parallel bars equal to six diameters of the bars
used. When two curtains of steel are provided, the curtain
nearer the nozzle shall have a minimum spacing equal to 12
bar diameters and the remaining curtain shall have a mini-
mum spacing of six bar diameters.
Exception: Subject to the approval of the building offi-
cial, required clearances shall be reduced where it is
demonstrated by preconstruction tests that adequate
encasement of the bars used in the design will be
achieved.
1913.4.3 Splices. Lap splices of reinforcing bars shall uti-
lize the noncontact lap splice method with a minimum clear-
ance of 2 inches (51 mm) between bars. The use of contact
lap splices necessary for support of the reinforcing is per-
mitted when approved by the building official, based on sat-
isfactory preconstruction tests that show that adequate
encasement of the bars will be achieved, and provided that
the splice is oriented so that a plane through the center of the
spliced bars is perpendicular to the surface of the shotcrete.
1913.4.4 Spirally tied columns. Shotcrete shall not be
applied to spirally tied columns.
1913.5 Preconstruction tests. When required by the building
official, a test panel shall be shot, cured, cored or sawn, exam-
ined and tested prior to commencement of the project. The
sample panel shall be representative of the project and simulate
job conditions as closely as possible. The panel thickness and
reinforcing shall reproduce the thickest and most congested
area specified in the structural design. It shall be shot at the
same angle, using the same nozzleman and with the same con-
crete mix design that will be used on the project. The equip-
ment used in preconstruction testing shall be the same
equipment used in the work requiring such testing, unless sub-
stitute equipment is approved by the building official.

CONCRETE

1913.6 Rebound. Any rebound or accumulated loose aggre-
gate shall be removed from the surfaces to be covered prior to
placing the initial or any succeeding layers of shotcrete.
Rebound shall not be used as aggregate.
1913.7 Joints. Except where permitted herein, unfinished
work shall not be allowed to stand for more than 30 minutes
unless edges are sloped to a thin edge. For structural elements
that will be under compression and for construction joints
shown on the approved construction documents, square joints
are permitted. Before placing additional material adjacent to
previously applied work, sloping and square edges shall be
cleaned and wetted.
1913.8 Damage. In-place shotcrete that exhibits sags, sloughs,
segregation, honeycombing, sand pockets or other obvious
defects shall be removed and replaced. Shotcrete above sags
and sloughs shall be removed and replaced while still plastic.
1913.9 Curing. During the curing periods specified herein,
shotcrete shall be maintained above 40°F (4°C) and in moist
condition.
1913.9.1 Initial curing. Shotcrete shall be kept continu-
ously moist for 24 hours after shotcreting is complete or
shall be sealed with an approved curing compound.
1913.9.2 Final curing. Final curing shall continue for seven
days after
shotcreting, or
for
three days
if high-
early-strength cement is used, or until the specified strength
is obtained. Final curing shall consist of the initial curing
process or the shotcrete shall be covered with an approved
moisture-retaining cover.
1913.9.3 Natural curing. Natural curing shall not be used
in lieu of that specified in this section unless the relative
humidity remains at or above 85 percent, and is authorized
by the registered design professional and approved by the
building official.
1913.10 Strength tests. Strength tests for shotcrete shall be
made by an approved agency on specimens that are representa-
tive of the work and which have been water soaked for at least
24 hours prior to testing. When the maximum-size aggregate is
larger than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm), specimens shall consist of not less
than three 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) cores or 3-inch (76 mm)
cubes. When the maximum-size aggregate is 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
o r sm a l l e r, s p e c im e n s s h a l l c o n s i s t o f n o t
l e s s t h a n
2-inch-diameter (51 mm) cores or 2-inch (51 mm) cubes.
1913.10.1 Sampling. Specimens shall be taken from the
in-place work or from test panels, and shall be taken at least
once each shift, but not less than one for each 50 cubic yards
(38.2 m3) of shotcrete.
1913.10.2 Panel criteria. When the maximum-size aggre-
gate is larger than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm), the test panels shall
have minimum dimensions of 18 inches by 18 inches (457
mm by 457 mm). When the maximum size aggregate is 3/8
inch (9.5 mm) or smaller, the test panels shall have mini-
mum dimensions of 12 inches by 12 inches (305 mm by 305
mm). Panels shall be shot in the same position as the work,
during the course of the work and by the nozzlemen doing
the work. The conditions under which the panels are cured
shall be the same as the work.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

425

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:19 AM

9

shell shall not be included in the calculations for strength of the
column section. The minimum diameter of pipe columns shall
be 4 inches (102 mm) except that in structures of Type V con-
struction not exceeding three stories above grade plane or 40
feet (12 192 mm) in building height, pipe columns used in
basements and as secondary steel members shall have a mini-
mum diameter of 3 inches (76 mm).
1915.6 Approvals. Details of column connections and splices
shall be shop fabricated by approved methods and shall be
approved only after tests in accordance with the approved
rules. Shop-fabricated concrete-filled pipe columns shall be
inspected by the building official or by an approved representa-
tive of the manufacturer at the plant.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONCRETE

1913.10.3 Acceptance criteria. The average compressive
strength of three cores from the in-place work or a single test
panel shall equal or exceed 0.85 f ¢c with no single core less
than 0.75 f ¢c. The average compressive strength of three
cubes taken from the in-place work or a single test panel
shall equal or exceed f ¢c with no individual cube less than
0.88 f ¢c. To check accuracy, locations represented by erratic
core or cube strengths shall be retested.

SECTION 1914
REINFORCED GYPSUM CONCRETE

1914.1 General. Reinforced gypsum concrete shall comply
with the requirements of ASTM C 317 and ASTM C 956.
1914.2 Minimum thickness. The minimum thickness of rein-
forced gypsum concrete shall be 2 inches (51 mm) except the
minimum required thickness shall be reduced to 11/2 inches (38
mm), provided the following conditions are satisfied:
1. The overall thickness, including the formboard, is not
less than 2 inches (51 mm).
2. The clear span of the gypsum concrete between supports
does not exceed 33 inches (838 mm).
3. Diaphragm action is not required.
4. The design live load does not exceed 40 pounds per
square foot (psf) (1915 Pa).

SECTION 1915
CONCRETE-FILLED PIPE COLUMNS

1915.1 General. Concrete-filled pipe columns shall be manu-
factured from standard, extra-strong or double-extra-strong
steel pipe or tubing that is filled with concrete so placed and
manipulated as to secure maximum density and to ensure com-
plete filling of the pipe without voids.
1915.2 Design. The safe supporting capacity of concrete-filled
pipe columns shall be computed in accordance with the
approved rules or as determined by a test.
1915.3 Connections. Caps, base plates and connections shall
be of approved types and shall be positively attached to the
shell and anchored to the concrete core. Welding of brackets
without mechanical anchorage shall be prohibited. Where the
pipe is slotted to accommodate webs of brackets or other con-
nections, the integrity of the shell shall be restored by welding
to ensure hooping action of the composite section.
1915.4 Reinforcement. To increase the safe load-supporting
capacity of concrete-filled pipe columns, the steel reinforce-
ment shall be in the form of rods, structural shapes or pipe
embedded in the concrete core with sufficient clearance to
ensure the composite action of the section, but not nearer than 1
inch (25 mm) to the exterior steel shell. Structural shapes used
as reinforcement shall be milled to ensure bearing on cap and
base plates.
1915.5 Fire-resistance-rating protection. Pipe columns shall
be of such size or so protected as to develop the required
fire-resistance ratings specified in Table 601. Where an outer
steel shell is used to enclose the fire protective covering, the

426

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

19_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:1)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:13:19 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 20

ALUMINUM

SECTION 2001
GENERAL

2001.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the quality, design,
fabrication and erection of aluminum.

SECTION 2002
MATERIALS

2002.1 General. Aluminum used for structural purposes in
buildings and structures shall comply with AA ASM 35 and
AA ADM 1. The nominal loads shall be the minimum design
loads required by Chapter 16.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

427

20_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:16)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:15:42 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

428

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

20_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:16)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:15:42 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 21

MASONRY

SECTION 2101
GENERAL

2101.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the materials, design,
construction and quality of masonry.
2101.2 Design methods. Masonry shall comply with the pro-
visions of one of the following design methods in this chapter
as well as the requirements of Sections 2101 through 2104.
Masonry designed by the allowable stress design provisions of
Section 2101.2.1, the strength design provisions of Section
2101.2.2 or the prestressed masonry provisions of Section
2101.2.3 shall comply with Section 2105.
2101.2.1 Allowable stress design. Masonry designed by
the allowable stress design method shall comply with the
provisions of Sections 2106 and 2107.
2101.2.2 Strength design. Masonry designed by the
strength design method shall comply with the provisions of
Sections 2106 and 2108, except that autoclaved aerated con-
crete (AAC) masonry shall comply with the provisions of
Section 2106, Section 1613.6.4 and Chapter 1 and Appen-
dix A of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.
2101.2.3 Prestressed masonry. Prestressed masonry shall
be designed in accordance with Chapters 1 and 4 of TMS
402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 and Section 2106. Special inspection
during construction shall be provided as set forth in Section
1704.5.
2101.2.4 Empirical design. Masonry designed by the
empirical design method shall comply with the provisions
of Sections 2106 and 2109 or Chapter 5 of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
2101.2.5 Glass unit masonry. Glass unit masonry shall
comply with the provisions of Section 2110 or Chapter 7 of
TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.
2101.2.6 Masonry veneer. Masonry veneer shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 14 or Chapter 6 of TMS
402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.
2101.3 Construction documents. The construction docu-
ments shall show all of the items required by this code includ-
ing the following:
1. Specified size, grade, type and location of reinforce-
ment, anchors and wall ties.
2. Reinforcing bars to be welded and welding procedure.
3. Size and location of structural elements.
4. Provisions for dimensional changes resulting from elas-
tic deformation, creep, shrinkage, temperature and mois-
ture.
5. Loads used in the design of masonry.
6. Specified compressive strength of masonry at stated ages
or stages of construction for which masonry is designed,
except where specifically exempted by this code.

7. Details of anchorage of masonry to structural members,
frames and other construction, including the type, size
and location of connectors.
8. Size and location of conduits, pipes and sleeves.
9. The minimum level of testing and inspection as defined
in Chapter 17, or an itemized testing and inspection pro-
gram that meets or exceeds the requirements of Chapter
17.
2101.3.1 Fireplace drawings. The construction documents
shall describe in sufficient detail the location, size and con-
struction of masonry fireplaces. The thickness and charac-
teristics of materials and the clearances from walls,
partitions and ceilings shall be indicated.

SECTION 2102
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

2102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
AAC MASONRY. Masonry made of autoclaved aerated con-
crete (AAC) units, manufactured without internal reinforce-
ment and bonded together using thin- or thick-bed mortar.
ADOBE CONSTRUCTION. Construction in which the exte-
rior load-bearing and nonload-bearing walls and partitions are
of unfired clay masonry units, and floors, roofs and interior
framing are wholly or partly of wood or other approved materi-
als.
Adobe, stabilized. Unfired clay masonry units to which
admixtures, such as emulsified asphalt, are added during the
manufacturing process to limit the units’ water absorption
so as to increase their durability.
Adobe, unstabilized. Unfired clay masonry units that do
not meet the definition of “Adobe, stabilized.”
ANCHOR. Metal rod, wire or strap that secures masonry to its
structural support.
ARCHITECTURAL TERRA COTTA. Plain or ornamental
hard-burned modified clay units, larger in size than brick, with
glazed or unglazed ceramic finish.
AREA.
Bedded. The area of the surface of a masonry unit that is in
contact with mortar in the plane of the joint.
Gross cross-sectional. The area delineated by the out-
to-out specified dimensions of masonry in the plane under
consideration.
Net cross-sectional. The area of masonry units, grout and
mortar crossed by the plane under consideration based on
out-to-out specified dimensions.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

429

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:28 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

AUTOCLAVED AERATED CONCRETE (AAC). Low-
density cementitious product of calcium silicate hydrates,
whose material specifications are defined in ASTM C 1386.
BED JOINT. The horizontal layer of mortar on which a
masonry unit is laid.
BOND BEAM. A horizontal grouted element within masonry
in which reinforcement is embedded.
BRICK.
Calcium silicate (sand lime brick). A masonry unit made
of sand and lime.
Clay or shale. A masonry unit made of clay or shale, usu-
ally formed into a rectangular prism while in the plastic state
and burned or fired in a kiln.
Concrete. A masonry unit having the approximate shape of
a rectangular prism and composed of inert aggregate parti-
cles embedded in a hardened cementitious matrix.
CAST STONE. A building stone manufactured from portland
cement concrete precast and used as a trim, veneer or facing on
or in buildings or structures.
CELL. A void space having a gross cross-sectional area
greater than 11/2 square inches (967 mm2).
CHIMNEY. A primarily vertical enclosure containing one or
more passageways for conveying flue gases to the outside
atmosphere.
CHIMNEY TYPES.
High-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for
removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning,
high-heat appliances producing combustion gases in excess
of 2,000°F (1093°C) measured at the appliance flue outlet
(see Section 2113.11.3).
Low-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for
removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning,
low-heat appliances producing combustion gases not in
excess of 1,000°F (538°C) under normal operating condi-
tions, but capable of producing combustion gases of
1,400°F (760°C) during intermittent forces firing for peri-
ods up to 1 hour. Temperatures shall be measured at the
appliance flue outlet.
Masonry type. A field-constructed chimney of solid
masonry units or stones.
Medium-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for
removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning,
medium-heat appliances producing combustion gases not
exceeding 2,000°F (1093°C) measured at the appliance flue
outlet (see Section 2113.11.2).
CLEANOUT. An opening to the bottom of a grout space of
sufficient size and spacing to allow the removal of debris.
COLLAR JOINT. Vertical longitudinal joint between wythes
of masonry or between masonry and backup construction that
is permitted to be filled with mortar or grout.
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY. Maximum
compressive force resisted per unit of net cross-sectional area

➡

➡

➡

➡

➡

➡

of masonry, determined by the testing of masonry prisms or a
function of individual masonry units, mortar and grout.
CONNECTOR. A mechanical device for securing two or
more pieces, parts or members together, including anchors,
wall ties and fasteners.
COVER. Distance between surface of reinforcing bar and
edge of member.
DIMENSIONS.
Actual. The measured dimension of a masonry unit or ele-
ment.
Nominal. The specified dimension plus an allowance for
the joints with which the units are to be laid. Thickness is
given first, followed by height and then length.
Specified. The dimensions specified for the manufacture or
construction of masonry, masonry units, joints or any other
component of a structure.
FIREPLACE. A hearth and fire chamber or similar prepared
place in which a fire may be made and which is built in con-
junction with a chimney.
FIREPLACE THROAT. The opening between the top of the
firebox and the smoke chamber.
FOUNDATION PIER. An isolated vertical foundation mem-
ber whose horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its
thickness does not exceed three times its thickness and whose
height is equal to or less than four times its thickness.
GROUTED MASONRY.
Grouted hollow-unit masonry. That form of grouted
masonry construction in which certain designated cells of
hollow units are continuously filled with grout.
Grouted multiwythe masonry. That form of grouted
masonry construction in which the space between the
wythes is solidly or periodically filled with grout.
HEAD JOINT. Vertical mortar joint placed between masonry
units within the wythe at the time the masonry units are laid.
HEIGHT, WALLS. The vertical distance from the foundation
wall or other immediate support of such wall to the top of the
wall.
MASONRY. A built-up construction or combination of build-
ing units or materials of clay, shale, concrete, glass, gypsum,
stone or other approved units bonded together with or without
mortar or grout or other accepted methods of joining.
Ashlar masonry. Masonry composed of various-sized rect-
angular units having sawed, dressed or squared bed sur-
faces, properly bonded and laid in mortar.
Coursed ashlar. Ashlar masonry laid in courses of stone of
equal height for each course, although different courses
shall be permitted to be of varying height.
Glass unit masonry. Masonry composed of glass units
bonded by mortar.
Plain masonry. Masonry in which the tensile resistance of
the masonry is taken into consideration and the effects of
stresses in reinforcement are neglected.

430

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:28 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Random ashlar. Ashlar masonry laid in courses of stone set
without continuous joints and laid up without drawn pat-
terns. When composed of material cut into modular heights,
discontinuous but aligned horizontal joints are discernible.
Reinforced masonry. Masonry construction in which rein-
forcement acting in conjunction with the masonry is used to
resist forces.
Solid masonry. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units
laid contiguously with the joints between the units filled
with mortar.
Unreinforced (plain) masonry. Masonry in which the ten-
sile resistance of masonry is taken into consideration and
the resistance of the reinforcing steel,
if present,
is
neglected.
MASONRY UNIT. Brick, tile, stone, glass block or concrete
block conforming to the requirements specified in Section
2103.
Clay. A building unit larger in size than a brick, composed
of burned clay, shale, fired clay or mixtures thereof.
Concrete. A building unit or block larger in size than 12
inches by 4 inches by 4 inches (305 mm by 102 mm by 102
mm) made of cement and suitable aggregates.
Hollow. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in
any plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is less than 75
percent of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the
same plane.
Solid. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in
every plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is 75 percent
or more of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the
same plane.
MORTAR. A plastic mixture of approved cementitious mate-
rials, fine aggregates and water used to bond masonry or other
structural units.
MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING. A mixture to bond con-
crete masonry units that contains hydraulic cement, glass fiber
reinforcement with or without inorganic fillers or organic mod-
ifiers and water.
PRESTRESSED MASONRY. Masonry in which internal
stresses have been introduced to counteract potential tensile
stresses in masonry resulting from applied loads.
PRISM. An assemblage of masonry units and mortar with or
without grout used as a test specimen for determining proper-
ties of the masonry.
RUBBLE MASONRY. Masonry composed of rough ly
shaped stones.
Coursed rubble. Masonry composed of roughly shaped
stones fitting approximately on level beds and well bonded.
Random rubble. Masonry composed of roughly shaped
stones laid without regularity of coursing but well bonded
and fitted together to form well-divided joints.
Rough or ordinary rubble. Masonry composed of
unsquared field stones laid without regularity of coursing
but well bonded.

➡

➡

MASONRY

RUNNING BOND. The placement of masonry units such that
head joints in successive courses are horizontally offset at least
one-quarter the unit length.
SHEAR WALL.
Detailed plain masonry shear wall. A masonry shear wall
designed to resist lateral forces neglecting stresses in rein-
forcement, and designed in accordance with Section
2106.1.
Intermediate prestressed masonry shear wall. A pre-
stressed masonry shear wall designed to resist lateral forces
considering stresses in reinforcement, and designed in
accordance with Section 2106.1.
Intermediate reinforced masonry shear wall. A masonry
shear wall designed to resist lateral forces considering
stresses in reinforcement, and designed in accordance with
Section 2106.1.
Ordinary plain masonry shear wall. A masonry shear
wall designed to resist lateral forces neglecting stresses in
reinforcement, and designed in accordance with Section
2106.1.
Ordinary plain prestressed masonry shear wall. A pre-
stressed masonry shear wall designed to resist lateral forces
considering stresses in reinforcement, and designed in
accordance with Section 2106.1.
Ordinary reinforced masonry shear wall. A masonry
shear wall designed to resist lateral forces considering
stresses in reinforcement, and designed in accordance with
Section 2106.1.
Special prestressed masonry shear wall. A prestressed
masonry shear wall designed to resist lateral forces consid-
ering stresses in reinforcement and designed in accordance
with Section 2106.1 except that only grouted, laterally
restrained tendons are used.
Special reinforced masonry shear wall. A masonry shear
wall designed to resist lateral forces considering stresses in
reinforcement, and designed in accordance with Section
2106.1.
SHELL. The outer portion of a hollow masonry unit as placed
in masonry.
SPECIFIED. Required by construction documents.
S P E C I F I E D C O M P R E S S I V E S T R E N G T H O F
MASONRY, f ¢m. Minimum compressive strength, expressed
as force per unit of net cross-sectional area, required of the
masonry used in construction by the construction documents,
and upon which the project design is based. Whenever the
quantity f ¢m is under the radical sign, the square root of numeri-
cal value only is intended and the result has units of pounds per
square inch (psi) (MPa).
STACK BOND. The placement of masonry units in a bond
pattern is such that head joints in successive courses are verti-
cally aligned. For the purpose of this code, requirements for
stack bond shall apply to masonry laid in other than running
bond.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

431

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:29 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

STONE MASONRY. Masonry composed of field, quarried or
cast stone units bonded by mortar.
Ashlar stone masonry. Stone masonry composed of rect-
angular units having sawed, dressed or squared bed surfaces
and bonded by mortar.
Rubble stone masonry. Stone masonry composed of irreg-
ular-shaped units bonded by mortar.
STRENGTH.
Design strength. Nominal strength multiplied by a strength
reduction factor.
Nominal strength. Strength of a member or cross section
calculated in accordance with these provisions before appli-
cation of any strength-reduction factors.
Required strength. Strength of a member or cross section
required to resist factored loads.
THIN-BED MORTAR. Mortar for use in construction of
AAC unit masonry with joints 0.06 inch (1.5 mm) or less.
TIE, LATERAL. Loop of reinforcing bar or wire enclosing
longitudinal reinforcement.
TIE, WALL. A connector that connects wythes of masonry
walls together.
TILE. A ceramic surface unit, usually relatively thin in relation
to facial area, made from clay or a mixture of clay or other
ceramic materials, called the body of the tile, having either a
“glazed” or “unglazed” face and fired above red heat in the
course of manufacture to a temperature sufficiently high
enough to produce specific physical properties and characteris-
tics.
TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY. A hollow masonry unit com-
posed of burned clay, shale, fire clay or mixture thereof, and
having parallel cells.
WALL. A vertical element with a horizontal length-to-thick-
ness ratio greater than three, used to enclose space.
Cavity wall. A wall built of masonry units or of concrete, or
a combination of these materials, arranged to provide an air-
space within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts
of the wall are tied together with metal ties.
Composite wall. A wall built of a combination of two or
more masonry units bonded together, one forming the
backup and the other forming the facing elements.
Dry-stacked, surface-bonded wall. A wall built of con-
crete masonry units where the units are stacked dry, without
mortar on the bed or head joints, and where both sides of the
wall are coated with a surface-bonding mortar.
Masonry-bonded hollow wall. A wall built of masonry
units so arranged as to provide an airspace within the wall,
and in which the facing and backing of the wall are bonded
together with masonry units.
Parapet wall. The part of any wall entirely above the roof
line.
WEB. An interior solid portion of a hollow masonry unit as
placed in masonry.

WYTHE. Each continuous, vertical section of a wall, one
masonry unit in thickness.

db
Fs

NOTATIONS.
= Diameter of reinforcement, inches (mm).
= Allowable tensile or compressive stress in reinforce-
ment, psi (MPa).
fr
= Modulus of rupture, psi (MPa).
f ¢AAC = Specified compressive strength of AAC masonry, the
minimum compressive strength for a class of AAC
masonry as specified in ASTM C 1386, psi (MPa).
= Specified compressive strength of masonry at age of 28
days, psi (MPa).
f ¢mi = Specified compressive strength of masonry at the time
of prestress transfer, psi (MPa).
= The lesser of the masonry cover, clear spacing between
adjacent reinforcement, or five times db, inches (mm).
= Distance between supports, inches (mm).
= Required development length or lap length of rein-
forcement, inches (mm).
= The applied load at failure, pounds (N).
= Thickness of the test specimen measured parallel to the
direction of load, inches (mm).
= Width of the test specimen measured parallel to the
loading cylinder, inches (mm).

P
St

Sw

f ¢m

K

Ls
ld

➡

➡

➡

➡

SECTION 2103
MASONRY CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
2103.1 Concrete masonry units. Concrete masonry units
shall conform to the following standards: ASTM C 55 for con-
crete brick; ASTM C 73 for calcium silicate face brick; ASTM
C 90 for load-bearing concrete masonry units or ASTM C 744
for prefaced concrete and calcium silicate masonry units.

2103.2 Clay or shale masonry units. Clay or shale masonry
units shall conform to the following standards: ASTM C 34 for
structural clay load-bearing wall tile; ASTM C 56 for struc-
tural clay nonload-bearing wall tile; ASTM C 62 for building
brick (solid masonry units made from clay or shale); ASTM C
1088 for solid units of thin veneer brick; ASTM C 126 for
ceramic-glazed structural clay facing tile, facing brick and
solid masonry units; ASTM C 212 for structural clay facing
tile; ASTM C 216 for facing brick (solid masonry units made
from clay or shale); ASTM C 652 for hollow brick (hollow
masonry units made from clay or shale) or ASTM C 1405 for
glazed brick (single-fired solid brick units).

Exception: Structural clay tile for nonstructural use in fire-
proofing of structural members and in wall furring shall not
be required to meet the compressive strength specifications.
The fire-resistance rating shall be determined in accordance
with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and shall comply with the
requirements of Table 602.

2103.3 AAC masonry. AAC masonry units shall conform to
ASTM C 1386 for the strength class specified.

432

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:29 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

➡

2103.4 Stone masonry units. Stone masonry units shall con-
form to the following standards: ASTM C 503 for marble
building stone (exterior); ASTM C 568 for limestone building
stone; ASTM C 615 for granite building stone; ASTM C 616
for sandstone building stone; or ASTM C 629 for slate building
stone.
2103.5 Ceramic tile. Ceramic tile shall be as defined in, and
shall conform to the requirements of, ANSI A137.1.
2103.6 Glass unit masonry. Hollow glass units shall be par-
tially evacuated and have a minimum average glass face thick-
ness of 3/16 inch (4.8 mm). Solid glass-block units shall be
provided when required. The surfaces of units intended to be in
contact with mortar shall be treated with a polyvinyl butyral
coating or latex-based paint. Reclaimed units shall not be used.
2103.7 Second-hand units. Second-hand masonry units shall
not be reused unless they conform to the requirements of new
units. The units shall be of whole, sound materials and free
from cracks and other defects that will interfere with proper
laying or use. Old mortar shall be cleaned from the unit before
reuse.
2103.8 Mortar. Mortar for use in masonry construction shall
conform to ASTM C 270 and Articles 2.1 and 2.6 A of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6, except for mortars listed in Sections
2103.9, 2103.10 and 2103.11. Type S or N mortar conforming
to ASTM C 270 shall be used for glass unit masonry.
2103.9 Surface-bonding mortar. Surface-bonding mortar
shall comply with ASTM C 887. Surface bonding of concrete
masonry units shall comply with ASTM C 946.
2103.10 Mortars for ceramic wall and floor tile. Portland
cement mortars for installing ceramic wall and floor tile shall
comply with ANSI A108.1A and ANSI A108.1B and be of the
compositions indicated in Table 2103.10.

TABLE 2103.10
CERAMIC TILE MORTAR COMPOSITIONS

LOCATION

MORTAR

COMPOSITION

Walls

Scratchcoat

Setting bed and
leveling coat

Floors

Setting bed

Ceilings

Scratchcoat and
sand bed

1 cement; 1/5 hydrated lime;
4 dry or 5 damp sand
1 cement; 1/2 hydrated lime;
5 damp sand to 1 cement
1 hydrated lime, 7 damp sand
1 cement; 1/10 hydrated lime;
5 dry or 6 damp sand; or 1
cement; 5 dry or 6 damp sand
1 cement; 1/2 hydrated lime;
21/2 dry sand or 3 damp sand

2103.10.1 Dry-set portland cement mortars. Premixed
prepared portland cement mortars, which require only the
addition of water and are used in the installation of ceramic
tile, shall comply with ANSI A118.1. The shear bond
strength for tile set in such mortar shall be as required in
accordance with ANSI A118.1. Tile set in dry-set portland
cement mortar shall be installed in accordance with ANSI
A108.5.
2103.10.2 Latex-modified portland cement mortar.
Latex-modified portland cement thin-set mortars in which
latex is added to dry-set mortar as a replacement for all or

MASONRY

part of the gauging water that are used for the installation of
ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.4. Tile set in
latex-modified portland cement shall be installed in accor-
dance with ANSI A108.5.
2103.10.3 Epoxy mortar. Ceramic tile set and grouted with
chemical-resistant epoxy shall comply with ANSI A118.3.
Tile set and grouted with epoxy shall be installed in accor-
dance with ANSI A108.6.
2103.10.4 Furan mortar and grout. Chemical-resistant
furan mortar and grout that are used to install ceramic tile
shall comply with ANSI A118.5. Tile set and grouted with
furan shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.8.
2103.10.5 Modified epoxy-emulsion mortar and grout.
Modified epoxy-emulsion mortar and grout that are used to
install ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.8. Tile set
and grouted with modified epoxy-emulsion mortar and
grout shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.9.
2103.10.6 Organic adhesives. Water-resistant organic
adhesives used for the installation of ceramic tile shall com-
ply with ANSI A136.1. The shear bond strength after water
immersion shall not be less than 40 psi (275 kPa) for Type I
adhesive and not less than 20 psi (138 kPa) for Type II adhe-
sive when tested in accordance with ANSI A136.1. Tile set
in organic adhesives shall be installed in accordance with
ANSI A108.4.
2103.10.7 Portland cement grouts. Portland cement
grouts used for the installation of ceramic tile shall comply
with ANSI A118.6. Portland cement grouts for tile work
shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.10.
2103.11 Mortar for AAC masonry. Thin-bed mortar for AAC
masonry shall comply with Article 2.1 C.1 of TMS 602/ACI
530.1/ASCE 6. Mortar used for the leveling courses of AAC
masonry shall comply with Article 2.1 C.2 of TMS 602/ACI
530.1/ASCE 6.
2103.12 Grout. Grout shall comply with Article 2.2 of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
2103.13 Metal reinforcement and accessories. Metal rein-
forcement and accessories shall conform to Article 2.4 of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6. Where unidentified reinforcement is
approved for use, not less than three tension and three bending
tests shall be made on representative specimens of the rein-
forcement from each shipment and grade of reinforcing steel
proposed for use in the work.

SECTION 2104
CONSTRUCTION
2104.1 Masonry construction. Masonry construction shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 2104.1.1 through
2104.4 and with TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
2104.1.1 Tolerances. Masonry, except masonry veneer,
shall be constructed within the tolerances specified in TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
2104.1.2 Placing mortar and units. Placement of mortar,
grout, and clay, concrete, glass, and AAC masonry units
shall comply with TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.

➡

➡

➡

➡

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

433

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:30 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

2104.1.3 Installation of wall ties. Wall
ties shall be
installed in accordance with TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
2104.1.4 Chases and recesses. Chases and recesses shall be
constructed as masonry units are laid. Masonry directly
above chases or recesses wider than 12 inches (305 mm)
shall be supported on lintels.
2104.1.5 Lintels. The design for lintels shall be in accor-
dance with the masonry design provisions of either Section
2107 or 2108.
2104.1.6 Support on wood. Masonry shall not be sup-
ported on wood girders or other forms of wood construction
except as permitted in Section 2304.12.
2104.2 Corbeled masonry. Corbeled masonry shall comply
with the requirements of Section 1.12 of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
2104.2.1 Molded cornices. Unless structural support and
anchorage are provided to resist the overturning moment,
the center of gravity of projecting masonry or molded cor-
nices shall lie within the middle one-third of the supporting
wall. Terra cotta and metal cornices shall be provided with a
structural frame of approved noncombustible material
anchored in an approved manner.
2104.3 Cold weather construction. The cold weather con-
struction provisions of TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6, Article
1.8 C, shall be implemented when the ambient temperature
falls below 40°F (4°C).
2104.4 Hot weather construction. The hot weather construc-
tion provisions of TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6, Article 1.8 D,
shall be implemented when the ambient air temperature
exceeds 100°F (37.8°C), or 90°F (32.2°C) with a wind velocity
greater than 8 mph (12.9 km/hr).

➡

➡

➡

SECTION 2105
QUALITY ASSURANCE

2105.1 General. A quality assurance program shall be used to
ensure that the constructed masonry is in compliance with the
construction documents.
The quality assurance program shall comply with the
inspection and testing requirements of Chapter 17.
2105.2 Acceptance relative to strength requirements.
2105.2.1 Compliance with f ¢m and f ¢AAC. Compressive
strength of masonry shall be considered satisfactory if the
compressive strength of each masonry wythe and grouted
collar joint equals or exceeds the value of f ¢m for clay and
concrete masonry and f ¢AAC for AAC masonry. For partially
grouted clay and concrete masonry,
the compressive
strength of both the grouted and ungrouted masonry shall
equal or exceed the applicable f ¢m . At the time of prestress,
the compressive strength of the masonry shall equal or
exceed f ¢mi, which shall be less than or equal to f ¢m.
2105.2.2 Determination of compressive strength. The
compressive strength for each wythe shall be determined by
the unit strength method or by the prism test method as spec-
ified herein.

434

2105.2.2.1 Unit strength method.

2105 .2 .2 .1 .1 C lay ma sonry. The comp re s s ive
strength of masonry shall be determined based on the
strength of the units and the type of mortar specified
using Table 2105.2.2.1.1, provided:
1. Units are sampled and tested to verify compli-
ance with ASTM C 62, ASTM C 216 or ASTM
C 652.
2. Thickness of bed joints does not exceed 5/8 inch
(15.9 mm).
3. For grouted masonry, the grout meets one of the
following requirements:
3.1. Grout conforms to Article 2.2 of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
3.2. Minimum grout compressive strength
equals or exceeds f ¢m but not less than
2,000 psi (13.79 MPa). The compressive
strength of grout shall be determined in
accordance with ASTM C 1019.

TABLE 2105.2.2.1.1
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CLAY MASONRY

NET AREA COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
OF CLAY MASONRY UNITS (psi)

Type M or S mortar

Type N mortar

NET AREA COMPRESSIVE
STRENGTH OF MASONRY
(psi)

1,700

3,350

4,950

6,600

8,250

9,900

11,500

2,100

4,150

6,200

8,250

10,300

—

—

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

4,000

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.

2105.2.2.1.2 Concrete masonry. The compressive
strength of masonry shall be determined based on the
strength of the unit and type of mortar specified using
Table 2105.2.2.1.2, provided:
1. U n i t s a r e s am p l e d a n d t e s t e d t o v e r i f y
compliance with ASTM C 55 or ASTM C 90.
2. Thickness of bed joints does not exceed 5/8 inch
(15.9 mm).
3. For grouted masonry, the grout meets one of the
following requirements:
3.1. Grout conforms to Article 2.2 of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
3.2. Minimum grout compressive strength
equals or exceeds f ¢m but not less than
2,000 psi (13.79 MPa). The compres-
sive strength of grout shall be deter-
mined in accordance with ASTM C
1019.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:30 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 2105.2.2.1.2
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE MASONRY

NET AREA COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF
CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS (psi)

Type M or S mortar

Type N mortar

NET AREA
COMPRESSIVE
STRENGTH OF
MASONRY (psi)a

1,250
1,900
2,800
3,750
4,800

1,300
2,150
3,050
4,050
5,250

1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.
a. For units less than 4 inches in height, 85 percent of the values listed.

2105 .2 .2 .1 .3 AAC ma sonry. The comp re s s ive
strength of AAC masonry shall be based on the
strength of the AAC masonry unit only and the fol-
lowing shall be met:
1. Units conform to ASTM C 1386.
2. Thickness of bed joints does not exceed 1/8 inch
(3.2 mm).
3. For grouted masonry, the grout meets one of the
following requirements:
3.1. Grout conforms to Article 2.2 of TMS
602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6.
3.2. Minimum grout compressive strength
equals or exceeds f ¢AAC but not less than
2,000 psi (13.79 MPa). The compres-
sive strength of grout shall be deter-
mined in accordance with ASTM C
1019.
2105.2.2.2 Prism test method.
2105.2.2.2.1 General. The compressive strength of
clay and concrete masonry shall be determined by the
prism test method:
1. Where specified in the construction documents.
2. Where masonry does not meet the requirements
for application of the unit strength method in
Section 2105.2.2.1.
2105.2.2.2.2 Number of prisms per test. A prism
test shall consist of three prisms constructed and
tested in accordance with ASTM C 1314.
2105.3 Testing prisms from constructed masonry. When
approved by the building official, acceptance of masonry that
does not meet the requirements of Section 2105.2.2.1 or
2105.2.2.2 shall be permitted to be based on tests of prisms cut
from the masonry construction in accordance with Sections
2105.3.1, 2105.3.2 and 2105.3.3.
2105.3.1 Prism sampling and removal. A set of three
masonry prisms that are at least 28 days old shall be saw cut
from the masonry for each 5,000 square feet (465 m2) of the
wall area that is in question but not less than one set of three
masonry prisms for the project. The length, width and
height dimensions of the prisms shall comply with the

MASONRY

requirements of ASTM C 1314. Transporting, preparation
and testing of prisms shall be in accordance with ASTM C
1314.
2105.3.2 Compressive strength calculations. The com-
pressive strength of prisms shall be the value calculated in
accordance ASTM C 1314, except that the net cross-sec-
tional area of the prism shall be based on the net mortar bed-
ded area.
2105.3.3 Compliance. Compliance with the requirement
for the specified compressive strength of masonry, f ¢m, shall
be considered satisfied provided the modified compressive
strength equals or exceeds the specified f ¢m. Additional test-
ing of specimens cut from locations in question shall be per-
mitted.

➡

➡

SECTION 2106
SEISMIC DESIGN
2106.1 Seismic design requirements for masonry. Masonry
structures and components shall comply with the requirements
in Section 1.17 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 depending on
the structure’s seismic design category as determined in Sec-
tion 1613.

SECTION 2107
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN

2107.1 General. The design of masonry structures using
allowable stress design shall comply with Section 2106 and the
requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE
5 except as modified by Sections 2107.2 through 2107.5.
2107.2 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 2.1.2, load com-
binations. Delete Section 2.1.2.1.
2107.3 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 2.1.9.7.1.1, lap
splices. Modify Section 2.1.9.7.1.1 as follows:
2.1.7.1.1 The minimum length of lap splices for reinforcing
bars in tension or compression, ld, shall be
ld = 0.002db fs
(Equation 21-1)
For SI: ld = 0.29db fs
but not less than 12 inches (305 mm). In no case shall the
length of the lapped splice be less than 40 bar diameters.
where:
db = Diameter of reinforcement, inches (mm).
fs = Computed stress in reinforcement due to design
loads, psi (MPa).
In regions of moment where the design tensile stresses in
the reinforcement are greater than 80 percent of the allow-
able steel tension stress, Fs, the lap length of splices shall be
increased not less than 50 percent of the minimum required
length. Other equivalent means of stress transfer to accom-
plish the same 50 percent increase shall be permitted. Where
epoxy coated bars are used, lap length shall be increased by
50 percent.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

435

21_ibc_2009pg435-436.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:14:05 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

2107.4 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 2.1.9.7, splices
of reinforcement. Modify Section 2.1.9.7 as follows:
2.1.9.7 Splices of reinforcement. Lap splices, welded
splices or mechanical splices are permitted in accordance
with the provisions of this section. All welding shall conform
to AWS D1.4. Welded splices shall be of ASTM A706 steel
reinforcement. Reinforcement larger than No. 9 (M #29)
shall be spliced using mechanical connections in accordance
with Section 2.1.9.7.3.
2107.5 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 2.3.6, maximum
bar size. Add the following to Chapter 2:
2.3.6 Maximum bar size. The bar diameter shall not exceed
one-eighth of the nominal wall thickness and shall not
exceed one-quarter of the least dimension of the cell, course
or collar joint in which it is placed.

➡

SECTION 2108
STRENGTH DESIGN OF MASONRY

2108.1 General. The design of masonry structures using
strength design shall comply with Section 2106 and the
requirements of Chapters 1 and 3 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE
5, except as modified by Sections 2108.2 through 2108.3.
Exception: AAC masonry shall comply with the require-
ments of Chapter 1 and Appendix A of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5.
2108.2 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 3.3.3.3 develop-
ment. Modify the second paragraph of Section 3.3.3.3 as follows:
The required development length of reinforcement shall
be determined by Equation (3-16), but shall not be less than
12 inches (305 mm) and need not be greater than 72 db.
2108.3 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, Section 3.3.3.4, splices.
Modify items (b) and (c) of Section 3.3.3.4 as follows:
3.3.3.4 (b). A welded splice shall have the bars butted and
welded to develop at least 125 percent of the yield strength,
ƒy , of the bar in tension or compression, as required. Welded
splices shall be of ASTM A 706 steel reinforcement.
Welded splices shall not be permitted in plastic hinge zones
of intermediate or special reinforced walls or special
moment frames of masonry.
3.3.3.4 (c). Mechanical splices shall be classified as Type 1
or 2 according to Section 21.2.6.1 of ACI 318. Type 1
mechanical splices shall not be used within a plastic hinge
zone or within a beam-column joint of intermediate or spe-
cial reinforced masonry shear walls or special moment
frames. Type 2 mechanical splices are permitted in any loca-
tion within a member.

SECTION 2109
EMPIRICAL DESIGN OF MASONRY

2109.1 General. Empirically designed masonry shall conform
to the requirements of Chapter 5 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE
5, except where otherwise noted in this section.
2109.1.1 Limitations. The use of empirical design of
masonry shall be limited as noted in Section 5.1.2 of TMS

436

➡

402/ACI 530/ASCE 5. The use of dry-stacked, surface-
bonded masonry shall be prohibited in Occupancy Category
IV structures. In buildings that exceed one or more of the
limitations of Section 5.1.2 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5,
masonry shall be designed in accordance with the engi-
neered design provisions of Section 2101.2.1, 2101.2.2 or
2101.2.3 or the foundation wall provisions of Section
1807.1.5.

2109.2 Surface-bonded walls. Dry-stacked, surface-bonded
concrete masonry walls shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 5 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, except where other-
wise noted in this section.

2109.2.1 Strength. Dry-stacked, surface-bonded concrete
masonry walls shall be of adequate strength and proportions
to support all superimposed loads without exceeding the
allowable stresses listed in Table 2109.2.1. Allowable
stresses not specified in Table 2109.2.1 shall comply with
the requirements of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.

TABLE 2109.2.1
ALLOWABLE STRESS GROSS CROSS-SECTIONAL
AREA FOR DRY-STACKED, SURFACE-BONDED
CONCRETE MASONRY WALLS

DESCRIPTION

Compression standard block
Flexural tension
Horizontal span
Vertical span
Shear

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESS
(psi)

45

30
18
10

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.006895 MPa.

2109.2.2 Construction. Construction of dry-stacked, sur-
face-bonded masonry walls, including stacking and level-
ing of units, mixing and application of mortar and curing
and protection shall comply with ASTM C 946.

2109.3 Adobe construction. Adobe construction shall comply
with this section and shall be subject to the requirements of this
code for Type V construction, Chapter 5 of TMS 402/ACI
530/ASCE 5, and this section.

2109.3.1 Unstabilized adobe.

2109.3.1.1 Compressive strength. Adobe units shall
have an average compressive strength of 300 psi (2068
kPa) when tested in accordance with ASTM C 67. Five
samples shall be tested and no individual unit is permit-
ted to have a compressive strength of less than 250 psi
(1724 kPa).

2109.3.1.2 Modulus of rupture. Adobe units shall have
an average modulus of rupture of 50 psi (345 kPa) when
tested in accordance with the following procedure. Five
samples shall be tested and no individual unit shall have a
modulus of rupture of less than 35 psi (241 kPa).

2109.3.1.2.1 Support conditions. A cured unit shall
be simply supported by 2-inch-diameter (51 mm)
cylindrical supports located 2 inches (51 mm) in from
each end and extending the full width of the unit.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009pg435-436.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:14:05 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2109.3.1.2.2 Loading conditions. A 2-inch-diameter
(51 mm) cylinder shall be placed at midspan parallel
to the supports.
2109.3.1.2.3 Testing procedure. A vertical load shall
be applied to the cylinder at the rate of 500 pounds per
minute (37 N/s) until failure occurs.
2109.3.1.2.4 Modulus of rupture determination.
The modulus of rupture shall be determined by the
equation:

2)

(Equation 21-2)

f r = 3 PLs /2 Sw (St
where, for the purposes of this section only:
Sw = Width of the test specimen measured parallel to
the loading cylinder, inches (mm).
fr = Modulus of rupture, psi (MPa).
Ls = Distance between supports, inches (mm).
St = Thickness of the test specimen measured paral-
lel to the direction of load, inches (mm).
P = The applied load at failure, pounds (N).
2109.3.1.3 Moisture content requirements. Adobe
units shall have a moisture content not exceeding 4 per-
cent by weight.
2109.3.1.4 Shrinkage cracks. Adobe units shall not
contain more than three shrinkage cracks and any single
shrinkage crack shall not exceed 3 inches (76 mm) in
length or 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) in width.
2109.3.2 Stabilized adobe.
2109.3.2.1 Material requirements. Stabilized adobe
s h a l l com p ly w i th th e m a t e r i a l r e q u i r em e n t s o f
unstabilized adobe in addition to Sections 2109.3.2.1.1
and 2109.3.2.1.2.
2109.3.2.1.1 Soil requirements. Soil used for stabi-
lized adobe units shall be chemically compatible with
the stabilizing material.
2109.3.2.1.2 Absorption requirements. A 4-inch
(102 mm) cube, cut from a stabilized adobe unit dried
to a constant weight in a ventilated oven at 212°F to
239°F (100°C to 115°C), shall not absorb more than
21/2 percent moisture by weight when placed upon a
constantly water-saturated, porous surface for seven
days. A minimum of five specimens shall be tested
and each specimen shall be cut from a separate unit.
2109.3.3 Allowable stress. The allowable compressive
stress based on gross cross-sectional area of adobe shall not
exceed 30 psi (207 kPa).
2109.3.3.1 Bolts. Bolt values shall not exceed those set
forth in Table 2109.3.3.1.
2109.3.4 Construction.
2109.3.4.1 General. Adobe construction shall be limited
as stated in Sections 2109.3.4.1.1 through 2109.3.4.1.4.
2109.3.4.1.1 Height restrictions. Adobe construc-
tion shall be limited to buildings not exceeding one

MASONRY

TABLE 2109.3.3.1
ALLOWABLE SHEAR ON BOLTS IN ADOBE MASONRY

DIAMETER OF BOLTS
(inches)

MINIMUM EMBEDMENT
(inches)

SHEAR
(pounds)

1/2
5/8
3/4
7/8

1
11/8

—
12
15
18
21
24

—
200
300
400
500
600

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 4.448 N.

story, except that two-story construction is allowed
when designed by a registered design professional.

2109.3.4.1.2 Mortar restrictions. Mortar for stabi-
lized adobe units shall comply with Chapter 21 or
adobe soil. Adobe soil used as mortar shall comply
with material requirements for stabilized adobe. Mor-
tar for unstabilized adobe shall be portland cement
mortar.
2109.3.4.1.3 Mortar joints. Adobe units shall be laid
with full head and bed joints and in full running bond.
2109.3.4.1.4 Parapet walls. Parapet walls con-
structed of adobe units shall be waterproofed.
2109.3.4.2 Wall thickness. The minimum thickness of
exterior walls in one-story buildings shall be 10 inches
(254 mm). The walls shall be laterally supported at inter-
vals not exceeding 24 feet (7315 mm). The minimum
thickness of interior load-bearing walls shall be 8 inches
(203 mm). In no case shall the unsupported height of any
wall constructed of adobe units exceed 10 times the
thickness of such wall.
2109.3.4.3 Foundations. Foundations for adobe con-
s t r u c t i o n s h a l l b e i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n s
2109.3.4.3.1 and 2109.3.4.3.2.
2109.3.4.3.1 Foundation support. Walls and parti-
tions constructed of adobe units shall be supported by
foundations or footings that extend not less than 6
inches (152 mm) above adjacent ground surfaces and
are constructed of solid masonry (excluding adobe) or
concrete. Footings and foundations shall comply with
Chapter 18.
2109.3.4.3.2 Lower course requirements. Stabi-
lized adobe units shall be used in adobe walls for the
first 4 inches (102 mm) above the finished first-floor
elevation.
2109.3.4.4 Isolated piers or columns. Adobe units shall
not be used for isolated piers or columns in a load-bear-
ing capacity. Walls less than 24 inches (610 mm) in
length shall be considered isolated piers or columns.
2109.3.4.5 Tie beams. Exterior walls and interior
load-bearing walls constructed of adobe units shall have
a continuous tie beam at the level of the floor or roof
bearing and meeting the following requirements.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

437

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:31 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

2109 .3 .4 .5 .1 Concrete tie beams . Concrete tie
beams shall be a minimum depth of 6 inches (152
mm) and a minimum width of 10 inches (254 mm).
Concrete tie beams shall be continuously reinforced
with a minimum of two No. 4 reinforcing bars. The
specifed compressive strength of concrete shall be at
least 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa).

2109.3.4.5.2 Wood tie beams. Wood tie beams shall be
solid or built up of lumber having a minimum nominal
thickness of 1 inch (25 mm), and shall have a minimum
depth of 6 inches (152 mm) and a minimum width of 10
inches (254 mm). Joints in wood tie beams shall be
spliced a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm). No splices
shall be allowed within 12 inches (305 mm) of an open-
ing. Wood used in tie beams shall be approved naturally
decay-resistant or preservative-treated wood.

2109.3.4.6 Exterior finish. Exterior walls constructed
of unstabilized adobe units shall have their exterior sur-
face covered with a minimum of two coats of portland
cement plaster having a minimum thickness of 3/4 inch
(19.1 mm) and conforming to ASTM C 926. Lathing
shall comply with ASTM C 1063. Fasteners shall be
spaced at 16 inches (406 mm) o.c. maximum. Exposed
wood surfaces shall be treated with an approved wood
preservative or other protective coating prior to lath
application.

2109.3.4.7 Lintels. Lintels shall be considered structural
members and shall be designed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Chapter 16.

SECTION 2110
GLASS UNIT MASONRY

2110.1 General. Glass unit masonry construction shall comply
with Chapter 7 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 and this section.

2110.1.1 Limitations. Solid or hollow approved glass
block shall not be used in fire walls, party walls, fire barri-
ers, fire partitions or smoke barriers, or for load-bearing
construction. Such blocks shall be erected with mortar and
reinforcement
in metal channel-type frames, structural
frames, masonry or concrete recesses, embedded panel
anchors as provided for both exterior and interior walls or
other approved joint materials. Wood strip framing shall not
be used in walls required to have a fire-resistance rating by
other provisions of this code.

Exceptions:

1. Glass-block assemblies having a fire protection
rating of not less than 3/4 hour shall be permitted as
opening protectives in accordance with Section
715 in fire barriers, fire partitions and smoke barri-
ers that have a required fire-resistance rating of 1
hour or less and do not enclose exit stairways, exit
ramps or exit passageways.
2. Glass-block assemblies as permitted in Section
404.6, Exception 2.

➡

438

SECTION 2111
MASONRY FIREPLACES

2111.1 Definition. A masonry fireplace is a fireplace con-
structed of concrete or masonry. Masonry fireplaces shall be
constructed in accordance with this section.

2111.2 Footings and foundations. Footings for masonry fire-
places and their chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or
solid masonry at least 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall
extend at least 6 inches (153 mm) beyond the face of the fire-
place or foundation wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded
on natural undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost
depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be at
least 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.

2111.2.1 Ash dump cleanout. Cleanout openings, located
within foundation walls below fireboxes, when provided,
shall be equipped with ferrous metal or masonry doors and
frames constructed to remain tightly closed, except when in
use. Cleanouts shall be accessible and located so that ash
removal will not create a hazard to combustible materials.

2111.3 Seismic reinforcing. Masonry or concrete fireplaces
shall be constructed, anchored, supported and reinforced as
required in this chapter. In Seismic Design Category C or D,
masonry and concrete fireplaces shall be reinforced and
anchored as detailed in Sections 2111.3.1, 2111.3.2, 2111.4
and 2111.4.1 for chimneys serving fireplaces. In Seismic
Design Category A or B, reinforcement and seismic anchorage
is not required. In Seismic Design Category E or F, masonry
and concrete chimneys shall be reinforced in accordance with
the requirements of Sections 2101 through 2108.

2111.3.1 Vertical reinforcing. For fireplaces with chim-
neys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous
vertical bars, anchored in the foundation, shall be placed in
the concrete between wythes of solid masonry or within the
cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted in accordance with
Section 2103.12. For fireplaces with chimneys greater than
40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two additional No. 4 vertical
bars shall be provided for each additional 40 inches (1016
mm) in width or fraction thereof.

2111.3.2 Horizontal reinforcing. Vertical reinforcement
shall be placed enclosed within 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) ties or
other reinforcing of equivalent net cross-sectional area,
spaced not to exceed 18 inches (457 mm) on center in con-
crete; or placed in the bed joints of unit masonry at a mini-
mum of every 18 inches (457 mm) of vertical height. Two
such ties shall be provided at each bend in the vertical bars.

2111.4 Seismic anchorage. Masonry and concrete chimneys
in Seismic Design Category C or D shall be anchored at each
floor, ceiling or roof line more than 6 feet (1829 mm) above
grade, except where constructed completely within the exterior
walls. Anchorage shall conform to the following requirements.
2111.4.1 Anchorage. Two 3/16-inch by 1-inch (4.8 mm by
25.4 mm) straps shall be embedded a minimum of 12 inches
(305 mm) into the chimney. Straps shall be hooked around
the outer bars and extend 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the
bend. Each strap shall be fastened to a minimum of four
floor joists with two 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) bolts.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:32 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2111.5 Firebox walls. Masonry fireboxes shall be constructed
of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid,
stone or concrete. When a lining of firebrick at least 2 inches
(51 mm) in thickness or other approved lining is provided, the
minimum thickness of back and sidewalls shall each be 8
inches (203 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. The
width of joints between firebricks shall not be greater than 1/4
inch (6.4 mm). When no lining is provided, the total minimum
thickness of back and sidewalls shall be 10 inches (254 mm) of
solid masonry. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C 27 or
ASTM C 1261 and shall be laid with medium-duty refractory
mortar conforming to ASTM C 199.
2111.5.1 Steel fireplace units. Steel fireplace units are per-
mitted to be installed with solid masonry to form a masonry
fireplace provided they are installed according to either the
requirements of their listing or the requirements of this sec-
tion. Steel fireplace units incorporating a steel firebox lining
shall be constructed with steel not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm)
in thickness, and an air-circulating chamber which is ducted
to the interior of the building. The firebox lining shall be
encased with solid masonry to provide a total thickness at the
back and sides of not less than 8 inches (203 mm), of which
not less than 4 inches (102 mm) shall be of solid masonry or
concrete. Circulating air ducts employed with steel fireplace
units shall be constructed of metal or masonry.
2111.6 Firebox dimensions. The firebox of a concrete or
masonry fireplace shall have a minimum depth of 20 inches
(508 mm). The throat shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm)
above the fireplace opening. The throat opening shall not be
less than 4 inches (102 mm) in depth. The cross-sectional area
of the passageway above the firebox, including the throat,
damper and smoke chamber, shall not be less than the
cross-sectional area of the flue.
Exception: Rumford fireplaces shall be permitted provided
that the depth of the fireplace is at least 12 inches (305 mm) and
at least one-third of the width of the fireplace opening, and the
throat is at least 12 inches (305 mm) above the lintel, and at
least 1/20 the cross-sectional area of the fireplace opening.
2111.7 Lintel and throat. Masonry over a fireplace opening
shall be supported by a lintel of noncombustible material. The
minimum required bearing length on each end of the fireplace
opening shall be 4 inches (102 mm). The fireplace throat or
damper shall be located a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm)
above the top of the fireplace opening.
2111.7.1 Damper. Masonry fireplaces shall be equipped
with a ferrous metal damper located at least 8 inches (203
mm) above the top of the fireplace opening. Dampers shall
be installed in the fireplace or at the top of the flue venting
the fireplace, and shall be operable from the room contain-
ing the fireplace. Damper controls shall be permitted to be
located in the fireplace.
2111.8 Smoke chamber walls. Smoke chamber walls shall be
constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units
grouted solid, stone or concrete. The total minimum thickness
of front, back and sidewalls shall be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid
masonry. The inside surface shall be parged smooth with
refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199. When a lining
of firebrick at least 2 inches (51 mm) thick, or a lining of vitri-

MASONRY

fied clay at least 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) thick, is provided, the total
minimum thickness of front, back and sidewalls shall be 6
inches (152 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. Fire-
brick shall conform to ASTM C 1261 and shall be laid with
refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199. Vitrified clay
linings shall conform to ASTM C 315.

2111.8.1 Smoke chamber dimensions. The inside height of
the smoke chamber from the fireplace throat to the beginning
of the flue shall not be greater than the inside width of the fire-
place opening. The inside surface of the smoke chamber shall
not be inclined more than 45 degrees (0.76 rad) from vertical
when prefabricated smoke chamber linings are used or when
the smoke chamber walls are rolled or sloped rather than
corbeled. When the inside surface of the smoke chamber is
formed by corbeled masonry, the walls shall not be corbeled
more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical.

2111.9  Hearth  and  hearth  extension. Masonry  fireplace
hearths and hearth extensions shall be constructed of concrete
or masonry, supported by noncombustible materials, and rein-
forced to carry their own weight and all imposed loads. No
combustible material shall remain against the underside of
hearths or hearth extensions after construction.

2111.9.1 Hearth thickness. The minimum thickness of
fireplace hearths shall be 4 inches (102 mm).

2111.9.2 Hearth extension thickness. The minimum
thickness of hearth extensions shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

Exception: When the bottom of the firebox opening is
raised at least 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the
hearth extension, a hearth extension of not less than
3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) brick, concrete, stone, tile or
other approved noncombustible material is permitted.

2111.10 Hearth extension dimensions. Hearth extensions
shall extend at least 16 inches (406 mm) in front of, and at least
8 inches (203 mm) beyond, each side of the fireplace opening.
Where the fireplace opening is 6 square feet (0.557 m2) or
larger, the hearth extension shall extend at least 20 inches (508
mm) in front of, and at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond, each
side of the fireplace opening.

2111.11 Fireplace clearance. Any portion of a masonry fire-
place located in the interior of a building or within the exterior
wall of a building shall have a clearance to combustibles of not
less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the front faces and sides of
masonry fireplaces and not less than 4 inches (102 mm) from the
back faces of masonry fireplaces. The airspace shall not be filled,
except to provide fireblocking in accordance with Section
2111.12.

Exceptions:
1. Masonry fireplaces listed and labeled for use in contact
with combustibles in accordance with UL 127 and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instal-
lation instructions are permitted to have combustible
material in contact with their exterior surfaces.
2. When masonry fireplaces are constructed as part of
masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials
shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

439

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:32 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

walls less than 12 inches (306 mm) from the inside
surface of the nearest firebox lining.
3. Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing
materials, such as wood siding, flooring and drywall,
are permitted to abut the masonry fireplace sidewalls
and hearth extension, in accordance with Figure
2111.11, provided such combustible trim or sheath-
ing is a minimum of 12 inches (306 mm) from the
inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.
4. Exposed combustible mantels or trim is permitted to be
placed directly on the masonry fireplace front sur-
rounding the fireplace opening, provided such com-
bustible materials shall not be placed within 6 inches
(153 mm) of a fireplace opening. Combustible material
directly above and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the
fireplace opening shall not project more than 1/8 inch
(3.2 mm) for each 1-inch (25 mm) distance from such
opening. Combustible materials located along the
sides of the fireplace opening that project more than
11/2 inches (38 mm) from the face of the fireplace shall
have an additional clearance equal to the projection.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm

FIGURE 2111.11
ILLUSTRATION OF EXCEPTION TO
FIREPLACE CLEARANCE PROVISION

2111.12 Fireplace fireblocking. All spaces between fireplaces
and floors and ceilings through which fireplaces pass shall be
fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in
place. The fireblocking of spaces between wood joists, beams or
headers shall be to a depth of 1 inch (25 mm) and shall only be
placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces
between combustible material and the chimney.
2111.13 Exterior air. Factory-built or masonry fireplaces cov-
ered in this section shall be equipped with an exterior air supply
to ensure proper fuel combustion unless the room is mechani-
cally ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is
neutral or positive.
2111.13.1 Factory-built fireplaces. Exterior combustion
air ducts for factory-built fireplaces shall be listed compo-
nents of the fireplace, and installed according to the fire-
place manufacturer’s instructions.
2111.13.2 Masonry fireplaces. Listed combustion air ducts
for masonry fireplaces shall be installed according to the
terms of their listing and manufacturer’s instructions.

2111.13.3 Exterior air intake. The exterior air intake shall
be capable of providing all combustion air from the exterior
of the dwelling. The exterior air intake shall not be located
within a garage, attic, basement or crawl space of the dwell-
ing nor shall the air intake be located at an elevation higher
than the firebox. The exterior air intake shall be covered
with a corrosion-resistant screen of 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) mesh.
2111.13.4 Clearance. Unlisted combustion air ducts shall
be installed with a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) clearance to
combustibles for all parts of the duct within 5 feet (1524
mm) of the duct outlet.
2111.13.5 Passageway. The combustion air passageway
shall be a minimum of 6 square inches (3870 mm2) and not
more than 55 square inches (0.035 m2), except that combus-
tion air systems for listed fireplaces or for fireplaces tested
for emissions shall be constructed according to the fireplace
manufacturer’s instructions.
2111.13.6 Outlet. The exterior air outlet is permitted to be
located in the back or sides of the firebox chamber or within
24 inches (610 mm) of the firebox opening on or near the
floor. The outlet shall be closable and designed to prevent
burning material from dropping into concealed combustible
spaces.

SECTION 2112
MASONRY HEATERS

2112.1 Definition. A masonry heater is a heating appliance
constructed of concrete or solid masonry, hereinafter referred
to as “masonry,” which is designed to absorb and store heat
from a solid fuel fire built in the firebox by routing the exhaust
gases through internal heat exchange channels in which the
flow path downstream of the firebox may include flow in a hor-
izontal or downward direction before entering the chimney and
which delivers heat by radiation from the masonry surface of
the heater.
2112.2 Installation. Masonry heaters shall be installed in accor-
dance with this section and comply with one of the following:
1. Masonry heaters shall comply with the requirements of
ASTM E 1602; or
2. Masonry heaters shall be listed and labeled in accor-
dance with UL 1482 and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions.
2112.3 Footings and foundation. The firebox floor of a
masonry heater shall be a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102
mm) of noncombustible material and be supported on a
noncombustible footing and foundation in accordance with
Section 2113.2.
2112.4 Seismic reinforcing. In Seismic Design Category D, E
and F, masonry heaters shall be anchored to the masonry foun-
dation in accordance with Section 2113.3. Seismic reinforcing
shall not be required within the body of a masonry heater with a
height that is equal to or less than 3.5 times its body width and
where the masonry chimney serving the heater is not supported
by the body of the heater. Where the masonry chimney shares a
common wall with the facing of the masonry heater, the chim-

440

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:34 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ney portion of the structure shall be reinforced in accordance
with Section 2113.
2112.5 Masonry heater clearance. Combustible materials
shall not be placed within 36 inches (765 mm) of the outside
surface of a masonry heater in accordance with NFPA 211,
Section 8-7 (clearances for solid fuel-burning appliances), and
the required space between the heater and combustible material
shall be fully vented to permit the free flow of air around all
heater surfaces.
Exceptions:
1. When the masonry heater wall thickness is at least 8
inches (203 mm) thick of solid masonry and the wall
thickness of the heat exchange channels is at least 5
inches (127 mm) thick of solid masonry, combustible
materials shall not be placed within 4 inches (102
mm) of the outside surface of a masonry heater. A
clearance of at least 8 inches (203 mm) shall be pro-
vided between the gas-tight capping slab of the heater
and a combustible ceiling.
2. Masonry heaters listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 1482 and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION 2113
MASONRY CHIMNEYS

2113.1 Definition. A masonry chimney is a chimney con-
structed of concrete or masonry, hereinafter referred to as
“masonry.” Masonry chimneys shall be constructed, anchored,
supported and reinforced as required in this chapter.
2113.2 Footings and foundations. Footings for masonry
chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry at
least 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend at least 6 inches
(152 mm) beyond the face of the foundation or support wall on
all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural undisturbed
earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected
to freezing, footings shall be at least 12 inches (305 mm) below
finished grade.
2113.3 Seismic reinforcing. Masonry or concrete chimneys
shall be constructed, anchored, supported and reinforced as
required in this chapter. In Seismic Design Category C or D,
masonry and concrete chimneys shall be reinforced and
anchored as detailed in Sections 2113.3.1, 2113.3.2 and
2113.4. In Seismic Design Category A or B, reinforcement and
seismic anchorage is not required. In Seismic Design Category
E or F, masonry and concrete chimneys shall be reinforced in
accordance with the requirements of Sections 2101 through
2108.
2113.3.1 Vertical reinforcing. For chimneys up to 40
inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous vertical bars
anchored in the foundation shall be placed in the concrete
between wythes of solid masonry or within the cells of hol-
low unit masonry and grouted in accordance with Section
2103.12. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the
flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal

MASONRY

expansion. For chimneys greater than 40 inches (1016 mm)
wide, two additional No. 4 vertical bars shall be provided for
each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction
thereof.
2113.3.2 Horizontal reinforcing. Vertical reinforcement
shall be placed enclosed within 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) ties, or
other reinforcing of equivalent net cross-sectional area,
spaced not to exceed 18 inches (457 mm) o.c. in concrete, or
placed in the bed joints of unit masonry, at a minimum of
every 18 inches (457 mm) of vertical height. Two such ties
shall be provided at each bend in the vertical bars.
2113.4 Seismic anchorage. Masonry and concrete chimneys
and foundations in Seismic Design Category C or D shall be
anchored at each floor, ceiling or roof line more than 6 feet
(1829 mm) above grade, except where constructed completely
within the exterior walls. Anchorage shall conform to the fol-
lowing requirements.
2113.4.1 Anchorage. Two 3/16-inch by 1-inch (4.8 mm by
25 mm) straps shall be embedded a minimum of 12 inches
(305 mm) into the chimney. Straps shall be hooked around
the outer bars and extend 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the
bend. Each strap shall be fastened to a minimum of four
floor joists with two 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) bolts.
2113.5 Corbeling. Masonry chimneys shall not be corbeled
more than half of the chimney’s wall thickness from a wall or
foundation, nor shall a chimney be corbeled from a wall or
foundation that is less than 12 inches (305 mm) in thickness
unless it projects equally on each side of the wall, except that on
the second story of a two-story dwelling, corbeling of chim-
neys on the exterior of the enclosing walls is permitted to equal
the wall thickness. The projection of a single course shall not
exceed one-half the unit height or one-third of the unit bed
depth, whichever is less.
2113.6 Changes in dimension. The chimney wall or chimney
flue lining shall not change in size or shape within 6 inches
(152 mm) above or below where the chimney passes through
floor components, ceiling components or roof components.
2113.7 Offsets. Where a masonry chimney is constructed with
a fireclay flue liner surrounded by one wythe of masonry, the
maximum offset shall be such that the centerline of the flue
above the offset does not extend beyond the center of the chim-
ney wall below the offset. Where the chimney offset is sup-
ported by masonry below the offset in an approved manner, the
maximum offset limitations shall not apply. Each individual
corbeled masonry course of the offset shall not exceed the pro-
jection limitations specified in Section 2113.5.
2113.8 Additional load. Chimneys shall not support loads
other than their own weight unless they are designed and con-
structed to support the additional load. Masonry chimneys are
permitted to be constructed as part of the masonry walls or con-
crete walls of the building.
2113.9 Termination. Chimneys shall extend at least 2 feet
(610 mm) higher than any portion of the building within 10 feet
(3048 mm), but shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the
highest point where the chimney passes through the roof.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

441

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:34 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

2113.9.1 Spark arrestors. Where a spark arrestor is
installed on a masonry chimney, the spark arrestor shall
meet all of the following requirements:
1. The net free area of the arrestor shall not be less than
four times the net free area of the outlet of the chim-
ney flue it serves.
2. The arrestor screen shall have heat and corrosion
resistance equivalent to 19-gage galvanized steel or
24-gage stainless steel.
3. Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres hav-
ing a diameter greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) nor block
the passage of spheres having a diameter less than 3/8
inch (11 mm).
4. The spark arrestor shall be accessible for cleaning and
the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow
for cleaning of the chimney flue.
2113.10 Wall thickness. Masonry chimney walls shall be con-
structed of concrete, solid masonry units or hollow masonry
units grouted solid with not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nomi-
nal thickness.
2113.10.1 Masonry veneer chimneys. Where masonry is
used as veneer for a framed chimney, through flashing and
weep holes shall be provided as required by Chapter 14.
2113.11 Flue lining (material). Masonry chimneys shall be
lined. The lining material shall be appropriate for the type of
appliance connected, according to the terms of the appliance
listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.
2113.11.1 Residential-type appliances (general). Flue
lining systems shall comply with one of the following:
1. Clay flue lining complying with the requirements of
ASTM C 315.
2. Listed chimney lining systems complying with UL
1777.
3. Factory-built chimneys or chimney units listed for
installation within masonry chimneys.
4. Other approved materials that will resist corrosion,
erosion, softening or cracking from flue gases and
condensate at temperatures up to 1,800°F (982°C).
2113.11.1.1 Flue linings for specific appliances. Flue
linings other than those covered in Section 2113.11.1
intended for use with specific appliances shall comply
with Sections 2113.11.1.2 through 2113.11.1.4 and Sec-
tions 2113.11.2 and 2113.11.3.
2113.11.1.2 Gas appliances. Flue lining systems for gas
appliances shall be in accordance with the International
Fuel Gas Code.

2113.11.1.3 Pellet fuel-burning appliances. Flue lining
and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with pel-
let fuel-burning appliances shall be limited to flue lining
systems complying with Section 2113.11.1 and pellet
vents listed for installation within masonry chimneys
(see Section 2113.11.1.5 for marking).
2113.11.1.4 Oil-fired appliances approved for use
with L-vent. Flue lining and vent systems for use in

442

masonry chimneys with oil-fired appliances approved
for use with Type L vent shall be limited to flue lining
systems complying with Section 2113.11.1 and listed
chimney liners complying with UL 641 (see Section
2113.11.1.5 for marking).
2113.11.1.5 Notice of usage. When a flue is relined with
a material not complying with Section 2113.11.1, the
chimney shall be plainly and permanently identified by a
label attached to a wall, ceiling or other conspicuous
location adjacent to where the connector enters the chim-
ney. The label shall include the following message or
equivalent language: “This chimney is for use only with
(type or category of appliance) that burns (type of fuel).
Do not connect other types of appliances.”
2113.11.2 Concrete and masonry chimneys for medium-
heat appliances.
2113.11.2.1 General. Concrete and masonry chimneys
for medium-heat appliances shall comply with Sections
2113.1 through 2113.5.
2113.11.2.2 Construction. Chimneys for medium-heat
appliances shall be constructed of solid masonry units or
of concrete with walls a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm)
thick, or with stone masonry a minimum of 12 inches
(305 mm) thick.
2113.11.2.3 Lining. Concrete and masonry chimneys
shall be lined with an approved medium-duty refractory
brick a minimum of 41/2 inches (114 mm) thick laid on
the 41/2-inch bed (114 mm) in an approved medium-
duty refractory mortar. The lining shall start 2 feet (610
mm) or more below the lowest chimney connector
entrance. Chimneys terminating 25 feet (7620 mm) or
less above a chimney connector entrance shall be lined
to the top.
2113 .11 .2 .4 Mu l t ip le pa s sageway. Conc re te and
masonry chimneys containing more than one passage-
way shall have the liners separated by a minimum
4-inch-thick (102 mm) concrete or solid masonry w all.
2 1 1 3 . 1 1 . 2 . 5 Te rm in a t i o n h e i g h t . C o n c r e t e a n d
masonry chimneys for medium-heat appliances shall
extend a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) higher than any
portion of any building within 25 feet (7620 mm).
2113.11.2.6 Clearance. A minimum clearance of 4
inches (102 mm) shall be provided between the exterior
s u r fa c e s o f a co n c r e t e o r m a s o n r y ch im n ey f o r
medium-heat appliances and combustible material.
2113.11.3 Concrete and masonry chimneys
high-heat appliances.
2113.11.3.1 General. Concrete and masonry chimneys
for high-heat appliances shall comply with Sections
2113.1 through 2113.5.
2113.11.3.2 Construction. Chimneys for high-heat
appliances shall be constructed with double walls of
solid masonry units or of concrete, each wall to be a mini-
mum of 8 inches (203 mm) thick with a minimum air-
space of 2 inches (51 mm) between the walls.

for

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:35 AM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2113.11.3.3 Lining. The inside of the interior wall shall
be lined with an approved high-duty refractory brick, a
minimum of 41/2 inches (114 mm) thick laid on the
41/2-inch bed (114 mm) in an approved high-duty refrac-
tory mortar. The lining shall start at the base of the chim-
ney and extend continuously to the top.
2 1 1 3 . 1 1 . 3 . 4 Te rm in a t i o n h e i g h t . C o n c r e t e a n d
masonry chimneys for high-heat appliances shall extend
a minimum of 20 feet (6096 mm) higher than any portion
of any building within 50 feet (15 240 mm).
2113.11.3.5 Clearance. Concrete and masonry chim-
neys for high-heat appliances shall have approved clear-
a n c e f r om b u i l d i n g s a n d s t r u c t u r e s t o p r ev e n t
overheating combustible materials, permit inspection
and maintenance operations on the chimney and prevent
danger of burns to persons.
2113.12 Clay flue lining (installation). Clay flue liners shall
be installed in accordance with ASTM C 1283 and extend from
a point not less than 8 inches (203 mm) below the lowest inlet
or, in the case of fireplaces, from the top of the smoke chamber
to a point above the enclosing walls. The lining shall be carried
up vertically, with a maximum slope no greater than 30 degrees
(0.52 rad) from the vertical.
Clay flue liners shall be laid in medium-duty refractory mor-
tar conforming to ASTM C 199 with tight mortar joints left
smooth on the inside and installed to maintain an air space or
insulation not to exceed the thickness of the flue liner separat-
ing the flue liners from the interior face of the chimney
masonry walls. Flue lining shall be supported on all sides. Only
enough mortar shall be placed to make the joint and hold the
liners in position.
2113.13 Additional requirements.
2113.13.1 Listed materials. Listed materials used as flue
linings shall be installed in accordance with the terms of
their listings and the manufacturer’s instructions.
2113.13.2 Space around lining. The space surrounding a
chimney lining system or vent installed within a masonry
chimney shall not be used to vent any other appliance.
Exception: This shall not prevent the installation of a
separate flue lining in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s instructions.
2113.14 Multiple flues. When two or more flues are located
in the same chimney, masonry wythes shall be built between
adjacent flue linings. The masonry wythes shall be at least 4
inches (102 mm) thick and bonded into the walls of the chim-
ney.
Exception: When venting only one appliance, two flues are
permitted to adjoin each other in the same chimney with
only the flue lining separation between them. The joints of

MASONRY

the adjacent flue linings shall be staggered at least 4 inches
(102 mm).
2113.15 Flue area (appliance). Chimney flues shall not be
smaller in area than the area of the connector from the appli-
ance. Chimney flues connected to more than one appliance
shall not be less than the area of the largest connector plus 50
percent of the areas of additional chimney connectors.
Exceptions:
1. Chimney flues serving oil-fired appliances sized in
accordance with NFPA 31.
2. Chimney flues serving gas-fired appliances sized in
accordance with the International Fuel Gas Code.

2113.16 Flue area (masonry fireplace). Flue sizing for chim-
neys serving fireplaces shall be in accordance with Section
2113.16.1 or 2113.16.2.
2113.16.1 Minimum area. Round chimney flues shall have
a minimum net cross-sectional area of at least 1/12 of the fire-
place opening. Square chimney flues shall have a minimum
net cross-sectional area of at least 1/10 of the fireplace open-
ing. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio less than
2 to 1 shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of at
least 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney
flues with an aspect ratio of 2 to 1 or more shall have a mini-
mum net cross-sectional area of at least 1/8 of the fireplace
opening.
2113.16.2 Determination of minimum area. The mini-
mum net cross-sectional area of the flue shall be determined
in accordance with Figure 2113.16. A flue size providing at
least the equivalent net cross-sectional area shall be used.
Cross-sectional areas of clay flue linings are as provided in
Tables 2113.16(1) and 2113.16(2) or as provided by the
manufacturer or as measured in the field. The height of the
chimney shall be measured from the firebox floor to the top
of the chimney flue.

TABLE 2113.16(1)
NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF ROUND FLUE SIZESa

FLUE SIZE, INSIDE DIAMETER
(inches)

CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA
(square inches)

6
7
8
10
10 3/4
12
15
18

28
38
50
78
90
113
176
254

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.
a. Flue sizes are based on ASTM C 315.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

443

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:35 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

TABLE 2113.16(2)
NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF SQUARE
AND RECTANGULAR FLUE SIZES

FLUE SIZE, OUTSIDE NOMINAL DIMENSIONS
(inches)

CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA
(square inches)

4.5 ´ 8.5
4.5 ´ 13
8 ´ 8
8.5 ´ 8.5
8 ´ 12
8.5 ´ 13
12 ´ 12
8.5 ´ 18
13 ´ 13
12 ´ 16
13 ´ 18
16 ´ 16
16 ´ 20
18 ´ 18
20 ´ 20
20 ´ 24
24 ´ 24

23
34
42
49
67
76
102
101
127
131
173
181
222
233
298
335
431

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

2113.17 Inlet. Inlets to masonry chimneys shall enter from
the side. Inlets shall have a thimble of fireclay, rigid refrac-
tory material or metal that will prevent the connector from
pulling out of the inlet or from extending beyond the wall of
the liner.
2113.18 Masonry chimney cleanout openings. Cleanout
openings shall be provided within 6 inches (152 mm) of the
base of each flue within every masonry chimney. The upper
edge of the cleanout shall be located at least 6 inches (152
mm) below the lowest chimney inlet opening. The height of
the opening shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm). The cleanout
shall be provided with a noncombustible cover.
Exception: Chimney flues serving masonry fireplaces,
where cleaning is possible through the fireplace opening.
2113.19 Chimney clearances. Any portion of a masonry
chimney located in the interior of the building or within the
exterior wall of the building shall have a minimum airspace
clearance to combustibles of 2 inches (51 mm). Chimneys
located entirely outside the exterior walls of the building,
including chimneys that pass through the soffit or cornice,
shall have a minimum airspace clearance of 1 inch (25 mm).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645 mm2.

FIGURE 2113.16
FLUE SIZES FOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS

444

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:48 AM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

MASONRY

T h e a i r s p a c e s h a l l n o t b e f i l l e d , ex c e p t
t o p r o v i d e
fireblocking in accordance with Section 2113.20.
Exceptions:
1. Masonry chimneys equipped with a chimney lining
system listed and labeled for use in chimneys in con-
tact with combustibles in accordance with UL 1777,
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, are permitted to have combustible mate-
rial in contact with their exterior surfaces.
2. Where masonry chimneys are constructed as part of
masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials
shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete
wall less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside sur-
face of the nearest flue lining.
3. Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing
materials, such as wood siding, are permitted to abut
the masonry chimney sidewalls, in accordance with
Figure 2113.19, provided such combustible trim or
sheathing is a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) from
the inside surface of the nearest flue lining. Combusti-
ble material and trim shall not overlap the corners of
the chimney by more than 1 inch (25 mm).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 2113.19
ILLUSTRATION OF EXCEPTION THREE
CHIMNEY CLEARANCE PROVISION

2113.20 Chimney fireblocking. All spaces between chimneys
and floors and ceilings through which chimneys pass shall be
fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in
place. The fireblocking of spaces between wood joists, beams
or headers shall be to a depth of 1 inch (25 mm) and shall only
be placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces
between combustible material and the chimney.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

445

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:50 AM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

446

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

21_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:17)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:22:50 AM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 22

STEEL

SECTION 2201
GENERAL

2201.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter govern the qual-
ity, design, fabrication and erection of steel used structurally in
buildings or structures.

SECTION 2202
DEFINITIONS

2202.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meaning shown herein.
STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED. That type
of construction made up entirely or in part of steel structural
members cold formed to shape from sheet or strip steel such as
roof deck, floor and wall panels, studs, floor joists, roof joists
and other structural elements.
STEEL JOIST. Any steel structural member of a building or
structure made of hot-rolled or cold-formed solid or open-web
sections, or riveted or welded bars, strip or sheet steel mem-
bers, or slotted and expanded, or otherwise deformed rolled
sections.
STEEL MEMBER, STRUCTURAL. Any steel structural
member of a building or structure consisting of a rolled steel struc-
tural shape other than cold-formed steel, or steel joist members.

SECTION 2203
IDENTIFICATION AND PROTECTION
OF STEEL FOR STRUCTURAL PURPOSES

2203.1 Identification. Identification of structural steel mem-
bers shall comply with the requirements contained in AISC
360. Identification of cold-formed steel members shall comply
with the requirements contained in AISI S100. Identification of
cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall also comply
with the requirements contained in AISI S200. Other steel fur-
nished for structural load-carrying purposes shall be properly
identified for conformity to the ordered grade in accordance
with the specified ASTM standard or other specification and
the provisions of this chapter. Steel that is not readily identifi-
able as to grade from marking and test records shall be tested to
determine conformity to such standards.
2203.2 Protection. Painting of structural steel members shall
comply with the requirements contained in AISC 360. Painting
of open-web steel joists and joist girders shall comply with the
requirements of SJI CJ-1.0, SJI JG-1.1, SJI K-1.1 and SJI
LH/DLH-1.1. Individual structural members and assembled
panels of cold-formed steel construction shall be protected
against corrosion in accordance with the requirements con-
tained in AISI S100. Protection of cold-formed steel light-
frame construction shall also comply with the requirements
contained in AISI S200.

SECTION 2204
CONNECTIONS

2204.1 Welding. The details of design, workmanship and tech-
nique for welding, inspection of welding and qualification of
welding operators shall conform to the requirements of the
specifications listed in Sections 2205, 2206, 2207, 2209 and
2210. Special inspection of welding shall be provided where
required by Section 1704.
2204.2 Bolting. The design, installation and inspection of bolts
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the specifica-
tions listed in Sections 2205, 2206, 2209 and 2210. Special
inspection of the installation of high-strength bolts shall be pro-
vided where required by Section 1704.
2204.2.1 Anchor rods. Anchor rods shall be set accurately
to the pattern and dimensions called for on the plans. The
protrusion of the threaded ends through the connected mate-
rial shall be sufficient to fully engage the threads of the nuts,
but shall not be greater than the length of the threads on the
bolts.

SECTION 2205
STRUCTURAL STEEL

2205.1 General. The design, fabrication and erection of struc-
tural steel for buildings and structures shall be in accordance
with AISC 360. Where required, the seismic design of steel
structures shall be in accordance with the additional provisions
of Section 2205.2.
2205.2 Seismic requirements for steel structures. The
design of structural steel structures to resist seismic forces shall
be in accordance with the provisions of Section 2205.2.1 or
2205.2.2 for the appropriate seismic design category.
2205.2.1 Seismic Design Category A, B or C. Structural
steel structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B or
C shall be of any construction permitted in Section 2205. An
R factor as set forth in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7 for the
appropriate steel system is permitted where the structure is
designed and detailed in accordance with the provisions of
AISC 341, Part I. Systems not detailed in accordance with
the above shall use the R factor in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7
designated for “structural steel systems not specifically
detailed for seismic resistance.”
2205.2.2 Seismic Design Category D, E or F. Structural
steel structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or
F shall be designed and detailed in accordance with AISC
341, Part I.
2205.3 Seismic requirements for composite construction.
The design, construction and quality of composite steel and
concrete components that resist seismic forces shall conform to
the requirements of the AISC 360 and ACI 318. An R factor as
set forth in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7 for the appropriate com-
posite steel and concrete system is permitted where the struc-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

447

22_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:18)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:24:15 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STEEL

ture is designed and detailed in accordance with the provisions
of AISC 341, Part II. In Seismic Design Category B or above,
the design of such systems shall conform to the requirements of
AISC 341, Part II.
2205.3.1 Seismic Design Categories D, E and F. Compos-
ite structures are permitted in Seismic Design Categories D ,
E and F, subject to the limitations in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE
7, where substantiating evidence is provided to demonstrate
that the proposed system will perform as intended by AISC
341, Part II. The substantiating evidence shall be subject to
building official approval. Where composite elements or
connections are required to sustain inelastic deformations,
the substantiating evidence shall be based on cyclic testing.

SECTION 2206
STEEL JOISTS

2206.1 General. The design, manufacture and use of open web
steel joists and joist girders shall be in accordance with one of
the following Steel Joist Institute (SJI) specifications:
1. SJI CJ-1.0
2. SJI K-1.1
3. SJI LH/DLH-1.1
4. SJI JG-1.1
Where required, the seismic design of buildings shall be in
accordance with the additional provisions of Section 2205.2 or
2210.5.
2206.2 Design. The registered design professional shall indi-
cate on the construction documents the steel joist and/or steel
joist girder designations from the specifications listed in Sec-
tion 2206.1 and shall indicate the requirements for joist and
joist girder design, layout, end supports, anchorage, non-SJI
standard bridging, bridging termination connections and bear-
ing connection design to resist uplift and lateral loads. These
documents shall indicate special requirements as follows:
1. Special loads including:
1.1. Concentrated loads;
1.2. Nonuniform loads;
1.3. Net uplift loads;
1.4. Axial loads;
1.5. End moments; and
1.6. Connection forces.
2. Special considerations including:
2.1. Profiles for nonstandard joist and joist girder
configurations (standard joist and joist girder
configurations are as indicated in the SJI cata-
log);
2.2. Oversized or other nonstandard web openings;
and
2.3. Extended ends.
3. Deflection criteria for live and total loads for non-SJI
standard joists.

2206.3 Calculations. The steel joist and joist girder manufac-
turer shall design the steel joists and/or steel joist girders in
accordance with the current SJI specifications and load tables
to support the load requirements of Section 2206.2. The regis-
tered design professional may require submission of the steel
joist and joist girder calculations as prepared by a registered
design professional responsible for the product design. If
requested by the registered design professional, the steel joist
manufacturer shall submit design calculations with a cover let-
ter bearing the seal and signature of the joist manufacturer’s
registered design professional. In addition to standard calcula-
tions under this seal and signature, submittal of the following
shall be included:

1. Non-SJI standard bridging details (e.g. for cantilevered
conditions, net uplift, etc.).

2. Connection details for:

2.1. Non-SJI standard connections (e.g. flush-framed
or framed connections);

2.2. Field splices; and

2.3. Joist headers.

2206.4 Steel joist drawings. Steel joist placement plans shall
be provided to show the steel joist products as specified on the
construction documents and are to be utilized for field installa-
tion in accordance with specific project requirements as stated
in Section 2206.2. Steel placement plans shall include, at a
minimum, the following:

1. Listing of all applicable loads as stated in Section 2206.2
and used in the design of the steel joists and joist girders
as specified in the construction documents.

2. Profiles for nonstandard joist and joist girder configura-
tions (standard joist and joist girder configurations are as
indicated in the SJI catalog).

3. Connection requirements for:

3.1. Joist supports;

3.2. Joist girder supports;

3.3. Field splices; and

3.4. Bridging attachments.

4. Deflection criteria for live and total loads for non-SJI
standard joists.

5. Size, location and connections for all bridging.

6. Joist headers.

Steel joist placement plans do not require the seal and signa-
ture of the joist manufacturer’s registered design professional.

2206.5 Certification. At completion of manufacture, the steel
joist manufacturer shall submit a certificate of compliance in
accordance with Section 1704.2.2 stating that work was per-
formed in accordance with approved construction documents
and with SJI standard specifications.

448

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

22_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:18)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:24:16 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 2207
STEEL CABLE STRUCTURES

2207.1 General. The design, fabrication and erection includ-
ing related connections, and protective coatings of steel cables
for buildings shall be in accordance with ASCE 19.
2207.2 Seismic requirements for steel cable. The design
strength of steel cables shall be determined by the provisions of
ASCE 19 except as modified by these provisions.
1. A load factor of 1.1 shall be applied to the prestress force
included in T3 and T4 as defined in Section 3.12.
2. In Section 3.2.1, Item (c) shall be replaced with “1.5 T3”
and Item (d) shall be replaced with “1.5 T4.”

SECTION 2208
STEEL STORAGE RACKS

2208.1 Storage racks. The design, testing and utilization of
industrial steel storage racks made of cold-formed or hot-rolled
steel structural members, shall be in accordance with the
RMI/ANSI MH 16.1. Where required by ASCE 7, the seismic
design of storage racks shall be in accordance with the provi-
sions of Section 15.5.3 of ASCE 7, except that items (1), (2)
and (3) of Section 15.5.3 of ASCE 7 do not apply when the rack
design satisfies RMI/ANSI MH 16.1.

SECTION 2209
COLD-FORMED STEEL

2209.1 General. The design of cold-formed carbon and
low-alloy steel structural members shall be in accordance with
AISI S100. The design of cold-formed stainless-steel struc-
tu r a l m emb e r s sh a l l b e in a c co rd an c e w i th ASCE 8 .
Cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall also comply
with Section 2210.
2 2 0 9 . 2 S t e e l d e ck s . T h e d e s ig n a n d c o n s t r u c t io n o f
cold-formed steel decks shall be in accordance with this sec-
tion.
2209.2.1 Composite slabs on steel decks. Composite slabs
of concrete and steel deck shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with ASCE 3.
2209.2.2 Noncomposite steel floor decks. Noncomposite
steel floor decks shall be permitted to be designed and con-
structed in accordance with ANSI/SDI-NC1.0, as modified
in Section 2209.2.2.1.
2209.9.2.2.1 ANSI/SDI-NC1.0 Section 2.4B1. Replace
Section 2.4B1 of ANSI/SDI-NC1.0 with the following:
1. General: The design of the concrete slabs shall be
done in accordance with the ACI Building Code
Requirements for Reinforced Concrete. The mini-
mum concrete thickness above the top of the deck
shall be 11/2 inches (38 mm).
2209.2.3 Steel roof deck. Steel roof decks shall be permit-
ted to be designed and constructed in accordance with
ANSI/SBI-RD1.0.

STEEL

SECTION 2210
COLD-FORMED STEEL
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION

2210.1 General. The design and installation of structural
members and nonstructural members utilized in cold-formed
steel light-frame construction where the specified minimum
base steel thickness is between 0.0179 inches (0.455 mm) and
0.1180 inches (2.997 mm) shall be in accordance with AISI
S200 and Sections 2210.2 through 2210.7, as applicable.

2 2 1 0 . 2 H e a d e r d e s i g n . H e a d e r s ,
i n c l u d i n g b o x a n d
back-to-back headers, and double and single L-headers shall
be designed in accordance with AISI S212 or AISI S100.

2210.3 Trusses.

2210.3.1 Design. Cold-formed steel
trusses shall be
designed in accordance with AISI S214, Sections 2210.3.1
through 2210.3.5 and accepted engineering practice.

2210.3.2 Truss design drawings. The truss design draw-
ings shall conform to the requirements of Section B2.3 of
AISI S214 and shall be provided with the shipment of
trusses delivered to the job site. The truss design drawings
shall include the details of permanent individual truss mem-
ber restraint/bracing in accordance with Section B6(a) or
B6(c) of AISI S214 where these methods are utilized to pro-
vide restraint/bracing.

2210.3.3 Deferred submittals. AISI Section B4.2 shall be
deleted.

2210.3.4 Trussses spanning 60 feet or greater. The owner

shall contract with a registered design professional for the
design of the temporary installation restraint/bracing and
the permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing for
trusses with clear spans 60 feet (18 288 mm) or greater. Spe-
cial inspection of trusses over 60 feet (18 288 mm) in length
shall conform to Section 1704.

2210.3.5 Truss quality assurance. Trusses not part of a
manufacturing process that provides requirements for qual-
ity control done under the supervision of a third-party qual-
ity control agency, shall be manufactured in compliance
with Sections 1704.2 and 1704.3, as applicable.

2210.4 Wall stud design. Wall studs shall be designed in
accordance with either AISI S211 or AISI S100.

2210.5 Floor and roof system design. Framing for floor and
roof systems in buildings shall be designed in accordance with
either AISI S210 or AISI S100.

2210.6 Lateral design. Light-frame shear walls, diagonal
strap bracing that is part of a structural wall and diaphragms
used to resist wind, seismic and other in-plane lateral loads
shall be designed in accordance with AISI S213.

2210.7 Prescriptive framing. Detached one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses, less than or equal to three stories
above grade plane, shall be permitted to be constructed in
accordance with AISI S230 subject to the limitations therein.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

449

22_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:18)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:24:16 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

450

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

22_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:18)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 10:24:16 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 23

WOOD

SECTION 2301
GENERAL

2301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
materials, design, construction and quality of wood members
and their fasteners.
2301.2 General design requirements. The design of struc-
tural elements or systems, constructed partially or wholly of
wood or wood-based products, shall be in accordance with one
of the following methods:
1. Allowable stress design in accordance with Sections
2304, 2305 and 2306.
2. Load and resistance factor design in accordance with
Sections 2304, 2305 and 2307.
3. Conventional light-frame construction in accordance
with Sections 2304 and 2308.
Exception: Buildings designed in accordance with
the provisions of the AF&PA WFCM shall be deemed
to meet the requirements of the provisions of Section
2308.
4. The design and construction of log structures shall be in
accordance with the provisions of ICC 400.
2301.3 Nominal sizes. For the purposes of this chapter, where
dimensions of lumber are specified, they shall be deemed to be
nominal dimensions unless specifically designated as actual
dimensions (see Section 2304.2).

SECTION 2302
DEFINITIONS

2302.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown herein.
ACCREDITATION BODY. An approved, third-party organi-
zation that is independent of the grading and inspection agen-
cies, and the lumber mills, and that initially accredits and
subsequently monitors, on a continuing basis, the competency
and performance of a grading or inspection agency related to
carrying out specific tasks.
BRACED WALL LINE. A series of braced wall panels in a
single story that meets the requirements of Section 2308.3 or
2308.12.4.
BRACED WALL PANEL. A section of wall braced in accor-
dance with Section 2308.9.3 or 2308.12.4.
COLLECTOR. A horizontal diaphragm element parallel and
in line with the applied force that collects and transfers dia-
phragm shear forces to the vertical elements of the lat-
eral-force-resisting system and/or distributes forces within the
diaphragm.
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION.
A type of construction whose primary structural elements are

formed by a system of repetitive wood-framing members. See
Section 2308 for conventional light-frame construction provi-
sions.
CRIPPLE WALL. A framed stud wall extending from the top
of the foundation to the underside of floor framing for the low-
est occupied floor level.
DIAPHRAGM, UNBLOCKED. A diaphragm that has edge
nailing at supporting members only. Blocking between sup-
porting structural members at panel edges is not included. Dia-
phragm panels are field nailed to supporting members.
DRAG STRUT. See “Collector.”
FIBERBOARD. A fibrous, homogeneous panel made from
lignocellulosic fibers (usually wood or cane) and having a den-
sity of less than 31 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (497 kg/m3) but
more than 10 pcf (160 kg/m3).
GLUED BUILT-UP MEMBER. A structural element, the
section of which is composed of built-up lumber, wood struc-
tural panels or wood structural panels in combination with lum-
ber, all parts bonded together with structural adhesives.
GRADE (LUMBER). The classification of lumber in regard
to strength and utility in accordance with American Softwood
Lumber Standard DOC PS 20 and the grading rules of an
approved lumber rules-writing agency.
HARDBOARD. A fibrous-felted, homogeneous panel made
from lignocellulosic fibers consolidated under heat and pres-
sure in a hot press to a density not less than 31 pcf (497 kg/m3).
NAILING, BOUNDARY. A special nailing pattern required
by design at the boundaries of diaphragms.
NAILING, EDGE. A special nailing pattern required by
design at the edges of each panel within the assembly of a dia-
phragm or shear wall.
NAILING, FIELD. Nailing required between the sheathing
panels and framing members at locations other than boundary
nailing and edge nailing.
NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. The heartwood of the
following species with the exception that an occasional piece
with corner sapwood is permitted if 90 percent or more of the
width of each side on which it occurs is heartwood.
Decay resistant. Redwood, cedar, black locust and black
walnut.
Termite resistant. Redwood, Alaska yellow-cedar, Eastern
redcedar and both heartwood and all sapwood of Western
redcedar.
NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER). The commercial size desig-
nation of width and depth, in standard sawn lumber and
glued-laminated lumber grades; somewhat larger than the stan-
dard net size of dressed lumber, in accordance with DOC PS 20
for sawn lumber and with the AF&PA NDS for glued-lami-
nated lumber.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

451

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:14 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

➡

PARTICLEBOARD. A generic term for a panel primarily
composed of cellulosic materials (usually wood), generally in
the form of discrete pieces or particles, as distinguished from
fibers. The cellulosic material is combined with synthetic resin
or other suitable bonding system by a process in which the
interparticle bond is created by the bonding system under heat
and pressure.
PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST. Structural member
manufactured using sawn or structural composite lumber
flanges and wood structural panel webs bonded together with
exterior exposure adhesives, which forms an “I” cross-sec-
tional shape.
SHEAR WALL. A wall designed to resist lateral forces paral-
lel to the plane of a wall.
Shear wall, perforated. A wood structural panel sheathed
wall with openings, that has not been specifically designed
and detailed for force transfer around openings.
Shear wall segment, perforated. A section of shear wall
with full-height sheathing that meets the height-to-width
ratio limits of Section 4.3.4 of AF&PA SDPWS.
STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER. Structural mem-
ber manufactured using wood elements bonded together with
exterior adhesives. Examples of structural composite lumber
are:
Laminated veneer lumber (LVL). A composite of wood
veneer sheet elements with wood fibers primarily oriented
along the length of the member.
Parallel strand lumber (PSL). A composite of wood
strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along
the length of the member.
STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED TIMBER. An
engineered, stress-rated product of a timber laminating plant,
comprised of assemblies of specially selected and prepared
wood laminations in which the grain of all laminations is
approximately parallel longitudinally and the laminations are
bonded with adhesives.
SUBDIAPHRAGM. A portion of a larger wood diaphragm
designed to anchor and transfer local forces to primary dia-
phragm struts and the main diaphragm.
TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN). A device used to resist uplift
of the chords of shear walls.
TREATED WOOD. Wood and wood-based materials that use
vacuum-pressure impregnation processes to enhance fire retar-
dant or preservative properties.
Fire-retardant-treated wood. Pressure-treated lumber
and plywood that exhibit reduced surface-burning charac-
teristics and resist propagation of fire.
Preservative-treated wood. Pressure-treated wood prod-
ucts that exhibit reduced susceptibility to damage by fungi,
insects or marine borers.
WOOD SHEAR PANEL. A wood floor, roof or wall compo-
nent sheathed to act as a shear wall or diaphragm.
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. A panel manufactured
from veneers, wood strands or wafers or a combination of

veneer and wood strands or wafers bonded together with water-
proof synthetic resins or other suitable bonding systems.
Examples of wood structural panels are:
Composite panels. A wood structural panel that is com-
prised of wood veneer and reconstituted wood-based mate-
rial and bonded together with waterproof adhesive;
Oriented strand board (OSB). A mat-formed wood struc-
tural panel comprised of thin rectangular wood strands
arranged in cross-aligned layers with surface layers nor-
mally arranged in the long panel direction and bonded with
waterproof adhesive; or
Plywood. A wood structural panel comprised of plies of
wood veneer arranged in cross-aligned layers. The plies are
bonded with waterproof adhesive that cures on application
of heat and pressure.

SECTION 2303
MINIMUM STANDARDS AND QUALITY

2303.1 General. Structural sawn lumber; end-jointed lumber;
prefabricated wood I-joists; structural glued-laminated timber;
wood structural panels, fiberboard sheathing (when used struc-
t u r a l l y ) ; h a r d b o a r d s i d i n g (w h e n u s e d s t r u c t u r a l l y ) ;
particleboard; preservative-treated wood; structural log mem-
bers; structural composite lumber; round timber poles and
piles; fire-retardant-treated wood; hardwood plywood; wood
trusses; joist hangers; nails; and staples shall conform to the
applicable provisions of this section.
2303.1.1 Sawn lumber. Sawn lumber used for load-sup-
porting purposes, including end-jointed or edge-glued lum-
ber, machine stress-rated or machine-evaluated lumber,
shall be identified by the grade mark of a lumber grading or
inspection agency that has been approved by an accredita-
tion body that complies with DOC PS 20 or equivalent.
Grading practices and identification shall comply with rules
published by an agency approved in accordance with the
procedures of DOC PS 20 or equivalent procedures. In lieu
of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as
to species and grade issued by a lumber grading or inspec-
tion agency meeting the requirements of this section is per-
mitted to be accepted for precut, remanufactured or
rough-sawn lumber and for sizes larger than 3 inches (76
mm) nominal thickness.
Approved end-jointed lumber is permitted to be used
interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same spe-
cies and grade.
2303.1.2 Prefabricated wood I-joists. Structural capaci-
ties and design provisions for prefabricated wood I-joists
shall be established and monitored in accordance with
ASTM D 5055.
2303.1.3 Structural glued-laminated timber. Glued-lam-
inated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as
required in ANSI/AITC A 190.1 and ASTM D 3737.
2303.1.4 Wood structural panels. Wood structural panels,
when used structurally (including those used for siding, roof
and wall sheathing, subflooring, diaphragms and built-up
members), shall conform to the requirements for their type

452

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:14 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

in DOC PS 1 or PS 2. Each panel or member shall be identi-
fied for grade and glue type by the trademarks of an
approved testing and grading agency. Wood structural panel
components shall be designed and fabricated in accordance
with the applicable standards listed in Section 2306.1 and
identified by the trademarks of an approved testing and
inspection agency indicating conformance with the applica-
ble standard. In addition, wood structural panels when per-
manently exposed in outdoor applications shall be of
exterior type, except that wood structural panel roof sheath-
ing exposed to the outdoors on the underside is permitted to
be interior type bonded with exterior glue, Exposure 1.
2303.1.5 Fiberboard. Fiberboard for its various uses shall
conform to ASTM C 208. Fiberboard sheathing, when used
structurally, shall be identified by an approved agency as
conforming to ASTM C 208.
2303.1.5.1 Jointing. To ensure tight-fitting assemblies,
edges shall be manufactured with square, shiplapped,
beveled, tongue-and-groove or U-shaped joints.
2303.1.5.2 Roof insulation. Where used as roof insula-
tion in all types of construction, fiberboard shall be pro-
tected with an approved roof covering.
2303 .1 .5 .3 Wa l l insu la t ion . Whe re ins ta l led and
fireblocked to comply with Chapter 7, fiberboards are
permitted as wall insulation in all types of construction.
In fire walls and fire barriers, unless treated to comply
with Section 803.1 for Class A materials, the boards shall
be cemented directly to the concrete, masonry or other
noncombustible base and shall be protected with an
approved noncombustible veneer anchored to the base
without intervening airspaces.
2303.1.5.3.1 Protection. Fiberboard wall insulation
applied on the exterior of foundation walls shall be
protected below ground level with a bituminous coat-
ing.
2303.1.6 Hardboard. Hardboard siding used structurally
shall be identified by an approved agency conforming to
CPA/ANSI A135.6. Hardboard underlayment shall meet
the strength requirements of 7/32-inch (5.6 mm) or 1/4-inch
(6.4 mm) service class hardboard planed or sanded on one
side to a uniform thickness of not less than 0.200 inch (5.1
mm). Prefinished hardboard paneling shall meet
the
requirements of CPA/ANSI A135.5. Other basic hardboard
products shall meet the requirements of CPA/ANSI A135.4.
Hardboard products shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturer’s recommendations.
2303.1.7 Particleboard. Particleboard shall conform to
ANSI A208.1. Particleboard shall be identified by the grade
mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved
agency. Particleboard shall not be utilized for applications
other than indicated in this section unless the particleboard
complies with the provisions of Section 2306.5.
2303.1.7.1 Floor underlayment. Particleboard floor
underlayment shall conform to Type PBU of ANSI
A208.1. Type PBU underlayment shall not be less than
1/4-inch (6.4 mm) thick and shall be installed in accor-

WOOD

dance with the instructions of the Composite Panel
Association.
2303.1.8 Preservative-treated wood. Lumber, timber, ply-
wood, piles and poles supporting permanent structures
required by Section 2304.11 to be preservative treated shall
conform to the requirements of the applicable AWPA Stan-
dard U1 and M4 for the species, product, preservative and
end use. Preservatives shall be listed in Section 4 of AWPA
U1. Lumber and plywood used in wood foundation systems
shall conform to Chapter 18.
2303.1.8.1 Identification. Wood required by Section
2304.11 to be preservative treated shall bear the quality
mark of an inspection agency that maintains continuing
supervision, testing and inspection over the quality of the
preservative-treated wood. Inspection agencies for pre-
servative-treated wood shall be listed by an accreditation
body that complies with the requirements of the Ameri-
can Lumber Standards Treated Wood Program, or equiv-
alent. The quality mark shall be on a stamp or label
affixed to the preservative-treated wood, and shall
include the following information:
1. Identification of treating manufacturer.
2. Type of preservative used.
3. Minimum preservative retention (pcf).
4. End use for which the product is treated.
5. AWPA standard to which the product was treated.
6. Identity of the accredited inspection agency.
2 3 0 3 . 1 . 8 . 2 M o i s t u re c o n t e n t . W h e r e p re s e r v a-
tive-treated wood is used in enclosed locations where
drying in service cannot readily occur, such wood shall
be at a moisture content of 19 percent or less before being
covered with insulation, interior wall finish, floor cover-
ing or other materials.
2303.1.9 Structural composite lumber. Structural capaci-
ties for structural composite lumber shall be established and
monitored in accordance with ASTM D 5456.
2303.1.10 Structural log members. Stress grading of
structural log members of nonrectangular shape, as typi-
cally used in log buildings, shall be in accordance with
ASTM D 3957. Such structural log members shall be identi-
fied by the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or
inspection agency. In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a
certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a
lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the require-
ments of this section shall be permitted.
2303.1.11 Round timber poles and piles. Round timber
poles and piles shall comply with ASTM D 3200 and ASTM
D 25, respectively.
2303.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood. Fire-retardant-treated
wood is any wood product which, when impregnated with
chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manu-
facture, shall have, when tested in accordance with ASTM E 84
or UL 723, a listed flame spread index of 25 or less and show no
evidence of significant progressive combustion when the test is
continued for an additional 20-minute period. Additionally, the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

453

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:14 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

flame front shall not progress more than 101/2 feet (3200 mm)
beyond the centerline of the burners at any time during the test.
2303.2.1 Pressure process. For wood products impreg-
nated with chemicals by a pressure process, the process
shall be performed in closed vessels under pressures not less
than 50 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (345 kPa).
2303.2.2 Other means during manufacture. For wood
products produced by other means during manufacture, the
treatment shall be an integral part of the manufacturing pro-
cess of the wood product. The treatment shall provide per-
manent protection to all surfaces of the wood product.
2303.2.3 Testing. For wood products produced by other
means during manufacture, other than a pressure process,
all sides of the wood product shall be tested in accordance
with and produce the results required in Section 2303.2.
Wood structural panels shall be permitted to test only the
front and back faces.
2303.2.4 Labeling. Fire-retardant-treated lumber and wood
structural panels shall be labeled. The label shall contain the
following items:
1. The identification mark of an approved agency in
accordance with Section 1703.5.
2. Identification of the treating manufacturer.
3. The name of the fire-retardant treatment.
4. The species of wood treated.
5. Flame spread and smoke-developed index.
6. Method of drying after treatment.
7. Conformance with appropriate standards in accor-
dance with Sections 2303.2.2 through 2303.2.5.
8. For fire-retardant-treated wood exposed to weather,
damp or wet locations, include the words “No
increase in the listed classification when subjected to
the Standard Rain Test” (ASTM D 2898).
2303.2.5 Strength adjustments. Design values for
untreated lumber and wood structural panels, as specified
in Section 2303.1, shall be adjusted for
fire-retar-
dant-treated wood. Adjustments to design values shall be
based on an approved method of investigation that takes
into consideration the effects of the anticipated tempera-
ture and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood
will be subjected, the type of treatment and redrying proce-
dures.
2303.2.5.1 Wood structural panels. The effect of
treatment and the method of redrying after treatment,
and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities
on the flexure properties of fire-retardant-treated soft-
wood plywood shall be determined in accordance with
ASTM D 5516. The test data developed by ASTM D
5516 shall be used to develop adjustment factors, maxi-
mum loads and spans, or both, for untreated plywood
design values in accordance with ASTM D 6305. Each
manufacturer shall publish the allowable maximum
loads and spans for service as floor and roof sheathing
for its treatment.

2303.2.5.2 Lumber. For each species of wood that is
treated, the effects of the treatment, the method of
redrying after treatment and exposure to high tempera-
tures and high humidities on the allowable design prop-
e r t i e s o f f i r e - r e t a r d a n t - t r e a t e d l um b e r s h a l l b e
determined in accordance with ASTM D 5664. The test
data developed by ASTM D 5664 shall be used to
develop modification factors for use at or near room tem-
perature and at elevated temperatures and humidity in
accordance with ASTM D 6841. Each manufacturer
shall publish the modification factors for service at tem-
peratures of not less than 80°F (27°C) and for roof fram-
ing. The roof framing modification factors shall take into
consideration the climatological location.
2303.2.6 Exposure to weather, damp or wet locations.

Where fire-retardant-treated wood is exposed to weather,
or damp or wet locations, it shall be identified as “Exte-
rior” to indicate there is no increase in the listed flame
spread index as defined in Section 2303.2 when subjected
to ASTM D 2898.
2303.2.7 Interior applications.
Interior
fire-retar-
dant-treated wood shall have moisture content of not over
28 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM D 3201
procedures at 92-percent
relative humidity.
Interior
fire-retardant-treated wood shall be tested in accordance
with Section 2303.2.5.1 or 2303.2.5.2. Interior fire-retar-
dant-treated wood designated as Type A shall be tested in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
2303.2.8 Moisture content. Fire-retardant-treated wood
shall be dried to a moisture content of 19 percent or less for
lumber and 15 percent or less for wood structural panels
before use. For wood kiln dried after treatment (KDAT),
the kiln temperatures shall not exceed those used in kiln
drying the lumber and plywood submitted for the tests
described in Section 2303.2.5.1 for plywood and
2303.2.5.2 for lumber.
2303.2.9 Type I and II construction applications. See
Section 603.1 for limitations on the use of fire-retar-
dant-treated wood in buildings of Type I or II construction.
2303.3 Hardwood and plywood. Hardwood and decorative
plywood shall be manufactured and identified as required in
HPVA HP-1.
2303.4 Trusses.
2303.4.1 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accor-
dance with the provisions of this code and accepted engi-
neering practice. Members are permitted to be joined by
nails, glue, bolts, timber connectors, metal connector plates
or other approved framing devices.
2303.4.1.1 Truss design drawings. The written, graphic
and pictorial depiction of each individual truss shall be
provided to the building official for approval prior to
installation. Truss design drawings shall also be pro-
vided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job
site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum,
the information specified below:
1. Slope or depth, span and spacing;

454

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:15 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. Location of all joints and support locations;
3. Number of plies if greater than one;
4. Required bearing widths;
5. Design loads as applicable, including;
5.1. Top chord live load;
5.2. Top chord dead load;
5.3. Bottom chord live load;
5.4. Bottom chord dead load;
5.5. Additional loads and locations; and
5.6. Environmental design criteria and loads
(wind, rain, snow, seismic, etc.).
6. Other lateral loads, including drag strut loads;
7. Adjustments to wood member and metal connec-
tor plate design value for conditions of use;
8. Maximum reaction force and direction, includ-
ing maximum uplift reaction forces where appli-
cable;
9. Metal-connector-plate type, size and thickness or
gage, and the dimensioned location of each metal
connector plate except where symmetrically
located relative to the joint interface;
10. Size, species and grade for each wood member;
11. Truss-to-truss connections and truss field assem-
bly requirements;
12. Calculated span-to-deflection ratio and maxi-
mum vertical and horizontal deflection for live
and total load as applicable;
13. Maximum axial tension and compression forces
in the truss members; and
14. Required permanent individual truss member
restraint location and the method and details of
restraint/bracing to be used in accordance with
Section 2303.4.1.2.
2303 .4 .1 .2 Permanent ind iv idua l truss member
restraint. Where permanent restraint of truss members
is required on the truss design drawings, it shall be
accomplished by one of the following methods:

1. Permanent individual truss member restraint/brac-
ing shall be installed using standard industry lat-
eral restraint/bracing details in accordance with
generally accepted engineering practice. Loca-
tions for lateral restraint shall be identified on the
truss design drawing.
2. The trusses shall be designed so that the buckling
of any individual truss member is resisted inter-
nally by the individual truss through suitable
means (i.e., buckling reinforcement by T-rein-
forcement or L-reinforcement, proprietary rein-
forcement, etc.). The buckling reinforcement of
individual members of the trusses shall be installed
as shown on the truss design drawing or on supple-

WOOD

mental truss member buckling reinforcement
details provided by the truss designer.
3. A project-specific permanent individual truss
member restraint/bracing design shall be permit-
ted to be specified by any registered design profes-
sional.

2303.4.1.3 Trusses spanning 60 feet or greater. The
owner shall contract with any qualified registered design
professional for the design of the temporary installation
restraint/bracing and the permanent individual truss
member restraint/bracing for all trusses with clear spans
60 feet (18 288 mm) or greater.
2303.4.1.4 Truss designer. The individual or organiza-
tion responsible for the design of trusses.
2 3 0 3 . 4 . 1 . 4 . 1 Tr u s s d e s i g n d r aw in g s . W h e r e

required by the registered design professional, the
building official or the statutes of the jurisdiction in
which the project is to be constructed, each individual
truss design drawing shall bear the seal and signature
of the truss designer.
Exceptions:
1. Where a cover sheet and truss index sheet
a r e comb in ed in to a s ing le sh e e t and
attached to the set of truss design drawings,
the single cover/truss index sheet is the only
document required to be signed and sealed
by the truss designer.
2. When a cover sheet and a truss index sheet
are separately provided and attached to the
set of truss design drawings, the cover sheet
and the truss index sheet are the only docu-
ments required to be signed and sealed by
the truss designer.
2303.4.2 Truss placement diagram. The truss manufac-
turer shall provide a truss placement diagram that identifies
the proposed location for each individually designated truss
and references the corresponding truss design drawing. The
truss placement diagram shall be provided as part of the
truss submittal package, and with the shipment of trusses
delivered to the job site. Truss placement diagrams that
serve only as a guide for installation and do not deviate from
the permit submittal drawings shall not be required to bear
the seal or signature of the truss designer.
2303.4.3 Truss submittal package. The truss submittal
package provided by the truss manufacturer shall consist of
each individual truss design drawing, the truss placement
diagram,
the
permanent
individual
truss member
restraint/bracing method and details and any other structural
details germane to the trusses; and, as applicable, the
cover/truss index sheet.
2303.4.4 Anchorage. The design for the transfer of loads
and anchorage of each truss to the supporting structure is the
responsibility of the registered design professional.

2303.4.5 Alterations to trusses. Truss members and com-
ponents shall not be cut, notched, drilled, spliced or other-
wise altered in any way without written concurrence and

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

455

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:16 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

approval of a registered design professional. Alterations
resulting in the addition of loads to any member (e.g.,
HVAC equipment, piping, additional roofing or insulation,
etc.) shall not be permitted without verification that the truss
is capable of supporting such additional loading.

2303.4.6 TPI 1 specifications. In addition to Sections
2303.4.1 through 2303.4.5, the design, manufacture and
quality assurance of metal-plate-connected wood trusses
shall be in accordance with TPI 1. Job-site inspections shall
be in compliance with Section 110.4, as applicable.

2303.4.7 Truss quality assurance. Trusses not part of a
manufacturing process in accordance with either Section
2303.4.6 or a standard listed in Chapter 35, which provides
requirements for quality control done under the supervision
of a third-party quality control agency, shall be manufac-
tured in compliance with Sections 1704.2 and 1704.6, as
applicable.

2303.5 Test standard for joist hangers and connectors. For
the required test standards for joist hangers and connectors, see
Section 1716.1.

2303.6 Nails and staples. Nails and staples shall conform to
requirements of ASTM F 1667. Nails used for framing and
sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending
yield strengths as follows: 80 kips per square inch (ksi) (551
MPa) for shank diameters larger than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm) but
not larger than 0.254 inch (6.45 mm), 90 ksi (620 MPa) for
shank diameters larger than 0.142 inch (3.61 mm) but not
larger than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm) and 100 ksi (689 MPa) for
shank diameters of at least 0.099 inch (2.51 mm) but not larger
than 0.142 inch (3.61 mm).

2303.7 Shrinkage. Consideration shall be given in design to
the possible effect of cross-grain dimensional changes consid-
ered vertically which may occur in lumber fabricated in a green
condition.

SECTION 2304
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

2304.1 General. The provisions of this section apply to design
methods specified in Section 2301.2.

2304.2 Size of structural members. Computations to deter-
mine the required sizes of members shall be based on the net
dimensions (actual sizes) and not nominal sizes.
2304.3 Wall framing. The framing of exterior and interior
walls shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in
Section 2308 unless a specific design is furnished.
2304.3.1 Bottom plates. Studs shall have full bearing on a
2-inch-thick (actual 11/2-inch, 38 mm) or larger plate or sill
having a width at least equal to the width of the studs.
2304.3.2 Framing over openings. Headers, double joists,
trusses or other approved assemblies that are of adequate
size to transfer loads to the vertical members shall be pro-
vided over window and door openings in load-bearing walls
and partitions.
2304.3.3 Shrinkage. Wood walls and bearing partitions
shall not support more than two floors and a roof unless an
analysis satisfactory to the building official shows that
shrinkage of the wood framing will not have adverse effects
on the structure or any plumbing, electrical or mechanical
systems, or other equipment installed therein due to exces-
sive shrinkage or differential movements caused by shrink-
age. The analysis shall also show that the roof drainage
system and the foregoing systems or equipment will not be
adversely affected or, as an alternate, such systems shall be
designed to accommodate the differential shrinkage or
movements.
2304.4 Floor and roof framing. The framing of wood-joisted
floors and wood framed roofs shall be in accordance with the
provisions specified in Section 2308 unless a specific design is
furnished.
2304.5 Framing around flues and chimneys. Combustible
framing shall be a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm), but shall not
be less than the distance specified in Sections 2111 and 2113
and the International Mechanical Code, from flues, chimneys
and fireplaces, and 6 inches (152 mm) away from flue open-
ings.
2304.6 Wall sheathing. Except as provided for in Section 1405
for weatherboarding or where stucco construction that com-
plies with Section 2510 is installed, enclosed buildings shall be
sheathed with one of the materials of the nominal thickness
specified in Table 2304.6 or any other approved material of
equivalent strength or durability.

SHEATHING TYPE

MINIMUM THICKNESS

MAXIMUM WALL STUD SPACING

TABLE 2304.6
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF WALL SHEATHING

Wood boards
Fiberboard
Wood structural panel
M-S “Exterior Glue” and M-2
“Exterior Glue” Particleboard
Gypsum sheathing
Gypsum wallboard
Reinforced cement mortar

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

456

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:17 AM

5/8 inch
1/2 inch
In accordance with Tables 2308.9.3(2) and 2308.9.3(3)

24 inches on center
16 inches on center
—

In accordance with Tables 2306.5 and 2308.9.3(4)

—

1/2 inch
1/2 inch
1 inch

6

16 inches on center
24 inches on center
24 inches on center

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

2304.6.1 Wood structural panel sheathing. Where wood
structural panel sheathing is used as the exposed finish on
the exterior of outside walls, it shall have an exterior expo-
sure durability classification. Where wood structural panel
sheathing is used elsewhere, but not as the exposed finish, it
shall be of a type manufactured with exterior glue (Exposure
1 or Exterior). Wood structural panel wall sheathing or sid-
ing used as structural sheathing shall be capable of resisting
wind pressures in accordance with Section 1609. Maximum
wind speeds for wood structural panel sheathing used to
resist wind pressures shall be in accordance with Table
2304.6.1 for enclosed buildings with a mean roof height not
greater than 30 feet (9144 mm), an importance factor (I) of
1.0 and a topographic factor (Kz t) of 1.0.
2304.6.2 Interior paneling. Softwood wood structural
panels used for interior paneling shall conform to the pro-
visions of Chapter 8 and shall be installed in accordance
with Table 2304.9.1. Panels shall comply with DOC PS 1
or PS 2. Prefinished hardboard paneling shall meet the

requirements of CPA/ANSI A135.5. Hardwood plywood
shall conform to HPVA HP-1.
2304.7 Floor and roof sheathing.
2304.7.1 Structural floor sheathing. Structural floor
sheathing shall be designed in accordance with the general
provisions of this code and the special provisions in this sec-
tion.
Floor sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table
2304.7(1), 2304.7(2), 2304.7(3) or 2304.7(4) shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this section.
2304.7.2 Structural roof sheathing. Structural roof sheath-
ing shall be designed in accordance with the general provi-
sions of this code and the special provisions in this section.
Roof sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table
2304.7(1), 2304.7(2), 2304.7(3) or 2304.7(5) shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this section. Wood struc-
tural panel roof sheathing shall be bonded by exterior glue.

TABLE 2304.6.1
MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) (3-SECOND GUST) PERMITTED FOR
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL WALL SHEATHING USED TO RESIST WIND PRESSURESa, b, c

MINIMUM NAIL

Size

Penetration
(inches)

MINIMUM WOOD
STRUCTURAL
PANEL SPAN
RATING

MINIMUM
NOMINAL PANEL
THICKNESS
(inches)

MAXIMUM
WALL STUD
SPACING
(inches)

6d common
(2.0² × 0.113²)

1.5

24/0

24/16

8d common
(2.5² × 0.131²)

1.75

24/16

3/8

7/16

7/16

16

16

16

24

PANEL NAIL SPACING

MAXIMUM WIND SPEED (MPH)

Edges
(inches o.c.)

Field
(inches o.c.)

6

6

6

6

12
12
6
12
6
12
6

Wind exposure category

B

110
110
150
130
150
110
110

C

90
100
125
110
125
90
90

D

85
90
110
105
110
85
85

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.
a. Panel strength axis shall be parallel or perpendicular to supports. Three-ply plywood sheathing with studs spaced more than 16 inches on center shall be applied
with panel strength axis perpendicular to supports.
b. The table is based on wind pressures acting toward and away from building surfaces in accordance with Section 6.4.2.2 of ASCE 7. Lateral requirements shall be in
accordance with Section 2305 or 2308.
c. Wood structural panels with span ratings of wall-16 or wall-24 shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 24/0 span rating. Plywood siding rated 16 o.c. or
24 o.c. shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 24/16 span rating. Wall-16 and plywood siding 16 o.c. shall be used with studs spaced a maximum of 16
inches o.c.

TABLE 2304.7(1)
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR LUMBER FLOOR AND ROOF SHEATHINGa, b

MINIMUM NET THICKNESS (inches) OF LUMBER PLACED

SPAN (inches)

Perpendicular to supports
Surfaced dryc

Surfaced unseasoned

Diagonally to supports
Surfaced dryc

Surfaced unseasoned

24
16

24

3/4
5/8

5/8

Floors

25/32
11/16

Roofs

11/16

3/4
5/8

3/4

25/32
11/16

25/32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Installation details shall conform to Sections 2304.7.1 and 2304.7.2 for floor and roof sheathing, respectively.
b. Floor or roof sheathing conforming with this table shall be deemed to meet the design criteria of Section 2304.7.
c. Maximum 19-percent moisture content.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

457

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:17 AM

7

458

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

TABLE 2304.7(2)
SHEATHING LUMBER, MINIMUM GRADE REQUIREMENTS: BOARD GRADE

SOLID FLOOR OR ROOF SHEATHING

SPACED ROOF SHEATHING

GRADING RULES

Utility

Standard

NLGA, WCLIB, WWPA

4 common or utility

3 common or standard

NLGA, WCLIB, WWPA, NSLB or NELMA

No. 3

No. 2

SPIB

Merchantable

Construction common

RIS

TABLE 2304.7(3)
ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOADS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHING AND
SINGLE-FLOOR GRADES CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS WITH
STRENGTH AXIS PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORTSa, b

SHEATHING GRADES

ROOFc

FLOORd

Panel span rating
roof/floor span

Panel thickness
(inches)

Maximum span (inches)

Loade (psf)

Maximum span
(inches)

With edge supportf Without edge support

Total load

Live load

16/0

3/8

16

16

40

30

0

20/0

3/8

20

20

40

30

0

24/0

3/8, 7/16, 1/2

24

20g

40

30

0

24/16

7/16, 1/2

24

24

50

40

16

32/16

15/32, 1/2, 5/8

32

28

40

30

16h

40/20

19/32, 5/8, 3/4, 7/8

40

32

40

30

20h,i

48/24

23/32, 3/4, 7/8

48

36

45

35

24

54/32

7/8, 1

54

40

45

35

32

60/32

7/8, 11/8

60

48

45

35

32

SINGLE FLOOR GRADES

ROOFc

FLOORd

Panel span rating

Panel thickness
(inches)

Maximum span (inches)

Loade (psf)

Maximum span
(inches)

With edge supportf Without edge support

Total load

Live load

16 o.c.

1/2, 19/32, 5/8

24

24

50

40

16h

20 o.c.

19/32, 5/8, 3/4

32

32

40

30

20h,i

24 o.c.

23/32, 3/4

48

36

35

25

24

32 o.c.

7/8, 1

48

40

50

40

32

48 o.c.

13/32, 11/8

60

48

50

40

48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.
a. Applies to panels 24 inches or wider.
b. Floor and roof sheathing conforming with this table shall be deemed to meet the design criteria of Section 2304.7.
c. Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only.
d. Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking unless 1/4-inch minimum thickness underlayment or 11/2 inches of
approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 3/4-inch wood strip. Allowable uniform load based on deflection of 1/360 of
span is 100 pounds per square foot except the span rating of 48 inches on center is based on a total load of 65 pounds per square foot.
e. Allowable load at maximum span.
f. Tongue-and-groove edges, panel edge clips (one midway between each support, except two equally spaced between supports 48 inches on center), lumber block-
ing or other. Only lumber blocking shall satisfy blocked diaphragm requirements.
g. For 1/2-inch panel, maximum span shall be 24 inches.
h. Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center where 3/4-inch wood strip flooring is installed at right angles to joist.
i. Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center for floors where 11/2 inches of cellular or lightweight concrete is applied over the panels.

➡

8

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:18 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2304.7(4)
ALLOWABLE SPAN FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL COMBINATION SUBFLOOR-UNDERLAYMENT (SINGLE FLOOR)a, b
(Panels Continuous Over Two or More Spans and Strength Axis Perpendicular to Supports)

IDENTIFICATION

Species groupc

1

2, 3

4

16

1/2

5/8

3/4

20

5/8

3/4

7/8

MAXIMUM SPACING OF JOISTS (inches)

24

Thickness (inches)

3/4

7/8

1

32

—

—

—

48

—

—

—

Single floor span ratingd

16 o.c.

20 o.c.

24 o.c.

32 o.c.

48 o.c.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.
a. Spans limited to value shown because of possible effects of concentrated loads. Allowable uniform loads based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 100 pounds per
square foot except allowable total uniform load for 11/8-inch wood structural panels over joists spaced 48 inches on center is 65 pounds per square foot. Panel edges
shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking, unless 1/4-inch minimum thickness underlayment or 11/2 inches of approved cel-
lular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 3/4-inch wood strip.
b. Floor panels conforming with this table shall be deemed to meet the design criteria of Section 2304.7.
c. Applicable to all grades of sanded exterior-type plywood. See DOC PS 1 for plywood species groups.
d. Applicable to Underlayment grade, C-C (Plugged) plywood, and Single Floor grade wood structural panels.

TABLE 2304.7(5)
ALLOWABLE LOAD (PSF) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL ROOF SHEATHING CONTINUOUS OVER
TWO OR MORE SPANS AND STRENGTH AXIS PARALLEL TO SUPPORTS
(Plywood Structural Panels Are Five-Ply, Five-Layer Unless Otherwise Noted)a, b

LOAD AT MAXIMUM SPAN (psf)

PANEL GRADE

THICKNESS (inch)

MAXIMUM SPAN (inches)

Structural I sheathing

Sheathing, other grades
covered in DOC PS 1 or
DOC PS 2

7/16

15/32

1/2

19/32, 5/8

23/32, 3/4

7/16

15/32

1/2

19/32

5/8

23/32, 3/4

24

24

24

24

24

16

24

24

24

24

24

Live

20

35c

40c

70

90

40

20

25

40c

45c

60c

Total

30

45c

50c

80

100

50

25

30

50c

55c

65c

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.
a. Roof sheathing conforming with this table shall be deemed to meet the design criteria of Section 2304.7.
b. Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only. Edges shall be blocked with lumber or other approved type
of edge supports.
c. For composite and four-ply plywood structural panel, load shall be reduced by 15 pounds per square foot.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

459

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:18 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

2304.8 Lumber decking.
2304.8.1 General. Lumber decking shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the general provisions of this
code and Section 2304.8. Each piece shall be square end
trimmed. When random lengths are furnished, each piece
shall be square end trimmed across the face so that at least
90 percent of the pieces are within 0.5 degrees (0.00873 rad)
of square. The ends of the pieces shall be permitted to be
beveled up to 2 degrees (0.0349 rad) from the vertical with
the exposed face of the piece slightly longer than the oppo-
site face of the piece. Tongue-and-groove decking shall be
installed with the tongues up on sloped or pitched roofs with
pattern faces down.
2304.8.2 Layup patterns. Lumber decking is permitted to
be laid up following one of five standard patterns as defined
in Sections 2304.8.2.1 through 2304.8.2.5. Other patterns
are permitted to be used provided they are substantiated
through engineering analysis.
2304.8.2.1 Simple span pattern. All pieces shall be sup-
ported on their ends (i.e., by two supports).
2304.8.2.2 Two-span continuous pattern. All pieces
shall be supported by three supports, and all end joints
shall occur in line on alternating supports. Supporting
members shall be designed to accommodate the load
redistribution caused by this pattern.
2304.8.2.3 Combination simple and two-span contin-
uous pattern. Courses in end spans shall be alternating
simple-span pattern and two-span continuous pattern.
End joints shall be staggered in adjacent courses and
shall bear on supports.
2304.8.2.4 Cantilevered pieces intermixed pattern.
The decking shall extend across a minimum of three
spans. Pieces in each starter course and every third
course shall be simple span pattern. Pieces in other
courses shall be cantilevered over the supports with end
joints at alternating quarter or third points of the spans.
Each piece shall bear on at least one support.
2304.8.2.5 Controlled random pattern. The decking
shall extend across a minimum of three spans. End joints
of pieces within 6 inches (152 mm) of the end joints of
the adjacent pieces in either direction shall be separated
by at least two intervening courses. In the end bays, each
piece shall bear on at least one support. Where an end
joint occurs in an end bay, the next piece in the same
course shall continue over the first inner support for at
least 24 inches (610 mm). The details of the controlled
random pattern shall be as specified for each decking
material in Section 2304.8.3.3, 2304.8.4.3 or 2304.8.5.3.
Decking that cantilevers beyond a support for a hori-
zontal distance greater than 18 inches (457 mm), 24
inches (610 mm) or 36 inches (914 mm) for 2-inch (51
mm), 3-inch (76 mm) and 4-inch (102 mm) nominal
thickness decking, respectively, shall comply with the
following:
1. The maximum cantilevered length shall be 30 per-
cent of the length of the first adjacent interior span.

2. A structural fascia shall be fastened to each deck-
ing piece to maintain a continuous, straight line.
3. There shall be no end joints in the decking between
the cantilevered end of the decking and the center-
line of the first adjacent interior span.
2304.8.3 Mechanically laminated decking.
2304.8.3.1 General. Mechanically laminated decking
consists of square-edged dimension lumber laminations
set on edge and nailed to the adjacent pieces and to the
supports.
2304.8.3.2 Nailing. The length of nails connecting lami-
nations shall not be less than two and one-half times the
net thickness of each lamination. Where decking sup-
ports are 48 inches (1219 mm) on center (o.c.) or less,
side nails shall be installed not more than 30 inches (762
mm) o.c. alternating between top and bottom edges, and
staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent lamina-
tions. Where supports are spaced more than 48 inches
(1219 mm) o.c., side nails shall be installed not more
than 18 inches (457 mm) o.c. alternating between top and
bottom edges and staggered one-third of the spacing in
adjacent laminations. Two side nails shall be installed at
each end of butt-jointed pieces.

Laminations shall be toenailed to supports with 20d or
larger common nails. Where the supports are 48 inches
(1219 mm) o.c. or less, alternate laminations shall be
toenailed to alternate supports; where supports are
spaced more than 48 inches (1219 mm) o.c., alternate
laminations shall be toenailed to every support.
2304.8.3.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be
a minimum distance of 24 inches (610 mm) between end
joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and sec-
ond courses shall bear on at least two supports with end
joints in these two courses occurring on alternate sup-
ports. A maximum of seven intervening courses shall be
permitted before this pattern is repeated.
2304.8.4 Two-inch sawn tongue-and-groove decking.
2304.8.4.1 General. Two-inch (51 mm) decking shall have
a maximum moisture content of 15 percent. Decking shall
be machined with a single tongue-and-groove pattern. Each
decking piece shall be nailed to each support.
2304.8.4.2 Nailing. Each piece of decking shall be
toenailed at each support with one 16d common nail
through the tongue and face-nailed with one 16d com-
mon nail.
2304.8.4.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be
a minimum distance of 24 inches (610 mm) between end
joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and sec-
ond courses shall bear on at least two supports with end
joints in these two courses occurring on alternate sup-
ports. A maximum of seven intervening courses shall be
permitted before this pattern is repeated.
2304.8.5 Three- and 4-inch sawn tongue-and-groove
decking.

460

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:19 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2304.8.5.1 General. Three-inch (76 mm) and 4-inch
(102 mm) decking shall have a maximum moisture con-
tent of 19 percent. Decking shall be machined with a
double tongue-and-groove pattern. Decking pieces shall
be interconnected and nailed to the supports.
2304.8.5.2 Nailing. Each piece shall be toenailed at each
support with one 40d common nail and face-nailed with
one 60d common nail. Courses shall be spiked to each other
with 8-inch (203 mm) spikes at maximum intervals of 30
inches (762 mm) through predrilled edge holes penetrating
to a depth of approximately 4 inches (102 mm). One spike
shall be installed at a distance not exceeding 10 inches (254
mm) from the end of each piece.
2304.8.5.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be
a minimum distance of 48 inches (1219 mm) between
end joints in adjacent courses. Pieces not bearing on a
support are permitted to be located in interior bays pro-
vided the adjacent pieces in the same course continue
over the support for at least 24 inches (610 mm). This
condition shall not occur more than once in every six
courses in each interior bay.
2304.9 Connections and fasteners.
2304.9.1 Fastener requirements. Connections for wood
members shall be designed in accordance with the appropri-
ate methodology in Section 2301.2. The number and size of
fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than
that set forth in Table 2304.9.1.
2304.9.2 Sheathing fasteners. Sheathing nails or other
approved sheathing connectors shall be driven so that their
head or crown is flush with the surface of the sheathing.
2304.9.3 Joist hangers and framing anchors. Connec-
tions depending on joist hangers or framing anchors, ties
and other mechanical fastenings not otherwise covered are
permitted where approved. The vertical load-bearing capac-
ity, torsional moment capacity and deflection characteris-
tics of joist hangers shall be determined in accordance with
Section 1716.1.
2304.9.4 Other fasteners. Clips, staples, glues and other
approved methods of
fastening are permitted where
approved.

2304.9.5 Fasteners and connectors in contact with pre-
servative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood. Fas-
teners and connectors in contact with preservative-treated
and fire-retardant-treated wood shall be in accordance with
Sections 2304.9.5.1 through 2304.9.5.4. The coating
weights for zinc-coated fasteners shall be in accordance
with ASTM A 153.
2304.9.5.1 Fasteners and connectors for preserva-
tive-treated wood. Fasteners in contact with preserva-
tive-treated wood shall be of hot-dipped zinc-coated
galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper.
Fasteners other than nails, timber rivets, wood screws
and lag screws shall be permitted to be of mechanically
deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in
accordance with ASTM B 695, Class 55 minimum. Con-
nectors that are used in exterior applications and in con-

WOOD

tact with preservative-treated wood shall have coating
types and weights in accordance with the treated wood or
connector manufacturer’s recommendations. In the
absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, a mini-
mum of ASTM A 653, type G185 zinc-coated galva-
nized steel, or equivalent, shall be used.

Exception: Plain carbon steel fasteners in SBX/DOT
and zinc borate preservative-treated wood in an inte-
rior, dry environment shall be permitted.

2304.9.5.2 Fastenings for wood foundations. Fasten-
ings for wood foundations shall be as required in AF&PA
PWF.

2304.9.5.3 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood
used in exterior applications or wet or damp loca-

tions. Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in
exterior applications or wet or damp locations shall be of
hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel,
silicon bronze or copper. Fasteners other than nails, tim-
ber rivets, wood screws and lag screws shall be permitted
to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with
coating weights in accordance with ASTM B 695, Class
55 minimum.

2304.9.5.4 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood
used in interior applications. Fasteners for fire-retar-
dant-treated wood used in interior locations shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
In the absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, Sec-
tion 2304.9.5.3 shall apply.

2304.9.6 Load path. Where wall framing members are not
continuous from foundation sill to roof, the members shall
be secured to ensure a continuous load path. Where
required, sheet metal clamps, ties or clips shall be formed of
galvanized steel or other approved corrosion-resistant mate-
rial not less than 0.040 inch (1.01 mm) nominal thickness.

2304.9.7 Framing requirements. Wood columns and posts
shall be framed to provide full end bearing. Alternatively,
column-and-post end connections shall be designed to resist
the full compressive loads, neglecting end-bearing capacity.
Column-and-post end connections shall be fastened to resist
lateral and net induced uplift forces.

2304.10 Heavy timber construction.

2304.10.1 Columns. Columns shall be continuous or super-
imposed throughout all stories by means of reinforced con-
crete or metal caps with brackets, or shall be connected by
properly designed steel or iron caps, with pintles and base
plates, or by timber splice plates affixed to the columns by
metal connectors housed within the contact faces, or by
other approved methods.

2304.10.1.1 Column connections. Girders and beams
shall be closely fitted around columns and adjoining
ends shall be cross tied to each other, or intertied by caps
or ties, to transfer horizontal loads across joints. Wood
bolsters shall not be placed on tops of columns unless the
columns support roof loads only.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

461

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:19 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

CONNECTION

1. Joist to sill or girder

2. Bridging to joist

3. 1² ´ 6² subfloor or less to each joist

TABLE 2304.9.1
FASTENING SCHEDULE

FASTENINGa, m

3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
2 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
2 - 3² 14 gage staples

2 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)

4. Wider than 1² ´ 6² subfloor to each joist

3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)

LOCATION

toenail

toenail each end

face nail

face nail

5. 2² subfloor to joist or girder

2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)

blind and face nail

6. Sole plate to joist or blocking

Sole plate to joist or blocking at braced
wall panel

7. Top plate to stud

8. Stud to sole plate

9. Double studs

10. Double top plates

Double top plates

11. Blocking between joists or rafters to top plate

12. Rim joist to top plate

13. Top plates, laps and intersections

14. Continuous header, two pieces

15. Ceiling joists to plate

16. Continuous header to stud

16d (31/2² ´ 0.135²) at 16² o.c.
3² ´ 0.131² nails at 8² o.c.
3² 14 gage staples at 12² o.c.
3 - 16d (31/2² ´ 0.135²) at 16² o.c.
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails at 16² o.c.
4 - 3² 14 gage staples at 16² o.c.
2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
4 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
16d (31/2² ´ 0.135²) at 24² o.c.
3² ´ 0.131² nail at 8² o.c.
3² 14 gage staple at 8² o.c.
16d (31/2² ´ 0.135²) at 16² o.c.
3² ´ 0.131² nail at 12² o.c.
3² 14 gage staple at 12² o.c.
8 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
12 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
12 - 3² 14 gage staples
3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
8d (21/2² ´ 0.131²) at 6² o.c.
3² ´ 0.131² nail at 6² o.c.
3² 14 gage staple at 6² o.c.
2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)

3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
5 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
5 - 3² 14 gage staples
4 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)

(continued)

typical face nail

braced wall panels

end nail

toenail

end nail

face nail

typical face nail

lap splice

toenail

toenail

face nail

16² o.c. along edge

toenail

toenail

462

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009pg462-464.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:52:00 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CONNECTION

FASTENINGa, m

LOCATION

TABLE 2304.9.1—continued
FASTENING SCHEDULE

WOOD

17. Ceiling joists, laps over partitions
(see Section 2308.10.4.1, Table 2308.10.4.1)

18. Ceiling joists to parallel rafters
(see Section 2308.10.4.1, Table 2308.10.4.1)

19. Rafter to plate
(see Section 2308.10.1, Table 2308.10.1)

20. 1² diagonal brace to each stud and plate

3 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²) minimum,
Table 2308.10.4.1
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples
3 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²) minimum,
Table 2308.10.4.1
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples
3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
2 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples

21. 1² ´ 8² sheathing to each bearing

3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)

22. Wider than 1² ´ 8² sheathing to each bearing

3 - 8d common (21/2² ´ 0.131²)

face nail

face nail

toenail

face nail

face nail

face nail

24² o.c.
16² o.c.
16² o.c.

face nail at top and bottom staggered
on opposite sides

face nail at ends and at each splice

23. Built-up corner studs

24. Built-up girder and beams

25. 2² planks

26. Collar tie to rafter

27. Jack rafter to hip

28. Roof rafter to 2-by ridge beam

29. Joist to band joist

16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3² ´ 0.131² nails
3² 14 gage staples

20d common (4² ´ 0.192²) 32² o.c.
3² ´ 0.131² nail at 24² o.c.
3² 14 gage staple at 24² o.c.
2 - 20d common (4² ´ 0.192²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples

16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)

at each bearing

3 - 10d common (3² ´ 0.148²)
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples
3 - 10d common (3² ´ 0.148²)
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
2 -16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
3 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
3 - 3² 14 gage staples
3 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples

(continued)

face nail

toenail

face nail

toenail

face nail

face nail

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

463

23_ibc_2009pg462-464.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:52:00 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

30. Ledger strip

CONNECTION

FASTENINGa, m

LOCATION

TABLE 2304.9.1—continued
FASTENING SCHEDULE

3 - 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.162²)
4 - 3² ´ 0.131² nails
4 - 3² 14 gage staples
1/2² and less

6dc, 1

face nail at each joist

31. Wood structural panels and particleboardb
Subfloor, roof and wall sheathing (to framing)

Single floor (combination subfloor-underlayment
to framing)

32. Panel siding (to framing)

33. Fiberboard sheathingg

34. Interior paneling

19/32² to 3/4²

7/8² to 1²
11/8² to 11/4²

3/4² and less
7/8² to 1²
11/8² to 11/4²
1/2² or less

5/8²
1/2²

25/32²

1/4²
3/8²

2 3/8² ´ 0.113² nailn
13/4² 16 gageo
8dd or 6de
23/8² ´ 0.113² nailp
2² 16 gagep
8dc
10dd or 8de

6de
8de
10dd or 8de
6df
8df

No. 11 gage roofing nailh
6d common nail (2² ´ 0.113²)
No. 16 gage staplei
No. 11 gage roofing nailh
8d common nail (21/2² ´ 0.131²)
No. 16 gage staplei

4dj
6dk

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Common or box nails are permitted to be used except where otherwise stated.
b. Nails spaced at 6 inches on center at edges, 12 inches at intermediate supports except 6 inches at supports where spans are 48 inches or more. For nailing of wood
structural panel and particleboard diaphragms and shear walls, refer to Section 2305. Nails for wall sheathing are permitted to be common, box or casing.
c. Common or deformed shank (6d - 2² ´ 0.113²; 8d - 21/2² ´ 0.131²; 10d - 3² ´ 0.148²).
d. Common (6d - 2² ´ 0.113²; 8d - 21/2² ´ 0.131²; 10d - 3² ´ 0.148²).
e. Deformed shank (6d - 2² ´ 0.113²; 8d - 21/2² ´ 0.131²; 10d - 3² ´ 0.148²).
f. Corrosion-resistant siding (6d - 17/8² ´ 0.106²; 8d - 23/8² ´ 0.128²) or casing (6d - 2² ´ 0.099²; 8d - 21/2² ´ 0.113²) nail.
g. Fasteners spaced 3 inches on center at exterior edges and 6 inches on center at intermediate supports, when used as structural sheathing. Spacing shall be 6 inches
on center on the edges and 12 inches on center at intermediate supports for nonstructural applications.
h. Corrosion-resistant roofing nails with 7/16-inch-diameter head and 11/2-inch length for 1/2-inch sheathing and 13/4-inch length for 25/32-inch sheathing.
i. Corrosion-resistant staples with nominal 7/16-inch crown or 1-inch crown and 11/4-inch length for 1/2-inch sheathing and 11/2-inch length for 25/32-inch sheathing.
Panel supports at 16 inches (20 inches if strength axis in the long direction of the panel, unless otherwise marked).
j. Casing (11/2² ´ 0.080²) or finish (11/2² ´ 0.072²) nails spaced 6 inches on panel edges, 12 inches at intermediate supports.
k. Panel supports at 24 inches. Casing or finish nails spaced 6 inches on panel edges, 12 inches at intermediate supports.
l. For roof sheathing applications, 8d nails (21/2² ´ 0.113²) are the minimum required for wood structural panels.
m. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch.
n. For roof sheathing applications, fasteners spaced 4 inches on center at edges, 8 inches at intermediate supports.
o. Fasteners spaced 4 inches on center at edges, 8 inches at intermediate supports for subfloor and wall sheathing and 3 inches on center at edges, 6 inches at interme-
diate supports for roof sheathing.
p. Fasteners spaced 4 inches on center at edges, 8 inches at intermediate supports.

464

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009pg462-464.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:52:01 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2304.10.2 Floor framing. Approved wall plate boxes or
hangers shall be provided where wood beams, girders or
trusses rest on masonry or concrete walls. Where intermedi-
ate beams are used to support a floor, they shall rest on top of
girders, or shall be supported by ledgers or blocks securely
fastened to the sides of the girders, or they shall be sup-
ported by an approved metal hanger into which the ends of
the beams shall be closely fitted.
2304.10.3 Roof framing. Every roof girder and at least
every alternate roof beam shall be anchored to its supporting
member; and every monitor and every sawtooth construc-
tion shall be anchored to the main roof construction. Such
anchors shall consist of steel or iron bolts of sufficient
strength to resist vertical uplift of the roof.
2304.10.4 Floor decks. Floor decks and covering shall not
extend closer than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) to walls. Such 1/2-inch
(12.7 mm) spaces shall be covered by a molding fastened to
the wall either above or below the floor and arranged such
that the molding will not obstruct the expansion or contrac-
tion movements of the floor. Corbeling of masonry walls
under floors is permitted in place of such molding.
2304.10.5 Roof decks. Where supported by a wall, roof
decks shall be anchored to walls to resist uplift forces deter-
mined in accordance with Chapter 16. Such anchors shall
consist of steel or iron bolts of sufficient strength to resist
vertical uplift of the roof.
2304.11 Protection against decay and termites.
2304.11.1 General. Where required by this section, protec-
tion from decay and termites shall be provided by the use of
naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.11.2 Wood used above ground. Wood used above
ground in the locations specified in Sections 2304.11.2.1
through 2304.11.2.7, 2304.11.3 and 2304.11.5 shall be nat-
urally durable wood or preservative-treated wood using
water-borne preservatives, in accordance with AWPA U1
(Commodity Specifications A or F) for above-ground use.
2304.11.2.1 Joists, girders and subfloor. Where wood
joists or the bottom of a wood structural floor without joists
are closer than 18 inches (457 mm), or wood girders are
closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to the exposed ground in
crawl spaces or unexcavated areas located within the perim-
eter of the building foundation, the floor construction
(including posts, girders, joists and subfloor) shall be of
naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.11.2.2 Wood supported by exterior foundation
walls. Wood framing members, including wood sheath-
ing, that rest on exterior foundation walls and are less
than 8 inches (203 mm) from exposed earth shall be of
naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.11.2.3 Exterior walls below grade. Wood fram-
ing members and furring strips attached directly to the
interior of exterior masonry or concrete walls below
grade shall be of approved naturally durable or preserva-
tive-treated wood.

WOOD

2304.11.2.4 Sleepers and sills. Sleepers and sills on a
concrete or masonry slab that is in direct contact with earth
shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.
2304.11.2.5 Girder ends. The ends of wood girders
entering exterior masonry or concrete walls shall be pro-
vided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) air space on top, sides
and end, unless naturally durable or preservative-treated
wood is used.
2304.11.2.6 Wood siding. Clearance between wood sid-
ing and earth on the exterior of a building shall not be less
than 6 inches (152 mm) or less than 2 inches (51 mm)
vertical from concrete steps, porch slabs, patio slabs and
similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather except
where siding, sheathing and wall framing are of naturally
durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.11.2.7 Posts or columns. Posts or columns sup-
porting permanent structures and supported by a con-
crete or masonry slab or footing that is in direct contact
with the earth shall be of naturally durable or preserva-
tive-treated wood.

Exceptions:
1. Posts or columns that are either exposed to the
weather or located in basements or cellars, sup-
ported by concrete piers or metal pedestals pro-
jected at least 1 inch (25 mm) above the slab or
deck and 6 inches (152 mm) above exposed
earth, and are separated therefrom by an imper-
vious moisture barrier.
2. Posts or columns in enclosed crawl spaces or
unexcavated areas located within the periphery of
the building, supported by a concrete pier or metal
pedestal at a height greater than 8 inches (203
mm) from exposed ground, and are separated
therefrom by an impervious moisture barrier.
2304.11.3 Laminated timbers. The portions of glued-lam-
inated timbers that form the structural supports of a building
or other structure and are exposed to weather and not fully
protected from moisture by a roof, eave or similar covering
shall be pressure treated with preservative or be manufac-
tured from naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.
2304.11.4 Wood in contact with the ground or fresh water.
Wood used in contact with the ground (exposed earth) in the
locations specified in Sections 2304.11.4.1 and 2304.11.4.2
shall be naturally durable (species for both decay and termite
resistance) or preservative treated using water-borne preser-
vatives in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specifi-
cations A or F) for soil or fresh water use.
Exception: Untreated wood is permitted where such
wood is continuously and entirely below the ground-
water level or submerged in fresh water.
2304.11.4.1 Posts or columns. Posts and columns sup-
porting permanent structures that are embedded in con-
crete that is in direct contact with the earth, embedded in
concrete that is exposed to the weather or in direct con-
tact with the earth shall be of preservative-treated wood.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

465

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:21 AM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

2304.11.4.2 Wood structural members. Wood struc-
tural members that support moisture-permeable floors or
roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or
masonry slabs, shall be of naturally durable or preserva-
tive-treated wood unless separated from such floors or
roofs by an impervious moisture barrier.
2304.11.5 Supporting member for permanent appurte-
nances. Naturally durable or preservative-treated wood
shall be utilized for those portions of wood members that
form the structural supports of buildings, balconies, porches
or similar permanent building appurtenances where such
members are exposed to the weather without adequate pro-
tection from a roof, eave, overhang or other covering to pre-
vent moisture or water accumulation on the surface or at
joints between members.
Exception: When a building is located in a geographical
region where experience has demonstrated that climatic
conditions preclude the need to use durable materials
where the structure is exposed to the weather.
2304.11.6 Termite protection.
In geographical areas
where hazard of termite damage is known to be very heavy,
wood floor framing shall be of naturally durable species
(termite resistant) or preservative treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 for the species, product preservative and end use
or provided with approved methods of termite protection.
2304.11.7 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs. Wood
installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative
treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specifi-
cations A or F) for soil and fresh water use.
2304.11.8 Attic ventilation. For attic ventilation, see Sec-
tion 1203.2.
2304.11.9 Under-floor ventilation (crawl space). For
under-floor ventilation (crawl space), see Section 1203.3.
2304.12 Long-term loading. Wood members supporting con-
crete, masonry or similar materials shall be checked for the
effects of long-term loading using the provisions of the
AF&PA NDS. The total deflection, including the effects of
long-term loading, shall be limited in accordance with Section
1604.3.1 for these supported materials.
Exception: Horizontal wood members supporting masonry
or concrete nonstructural floor or roof surfacing not more
than 4 inches (102 mm) thick need not be checked for
long-term loading.

SECTION 2305
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR
LATERAL-FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEMS

2305 .1 Genera l . S t ruc tu re s u s ing wood shea r wa l l s and
d iaph ragm s to re s is t w ind , se ism ic and o the r la te ra l load s
sha l l be de s igned and con s t ruc ted in acco rdance w i th
AF&PA SDPWS and the p rov is ion s o f Sections 2305, 2306
and 2307.
2305.1.1 Openings in shear panels. Openings in shear
panels that materially affect
their strength shall be

➡

detailed on the plans, and shall have their edges ade-
quately reinforced to transfer all shearing stresses.

2305.2 Diaphragm deflection. The deflection (D) of a
blocked wood structural panel diaphragm uniformly fas-
tened throughout with staples is permitted to be calculated
by using the following equation. If not uniformly fastened,
the constant 0.188 (For SI: 1/1627) in the third term shall be
modified accordingly.

D

=

5
3vL
8
EAb

+

vL
4
Gt

+

0188
.

Le

+

n

S D

(

X

)

c

2

b

(Equation 23-1)

➡

For SI:

D

=

3

0 052
.
vL
EAb

+

vL
4
Gt

+

n

Le
1627

+

S D

(

X

)

c

2

b

where:

en

Gt

A
B
E

= Area of chord cross section, in square inches (mm2).
= Diaphragm width, in feet (mm).
= Elastic modulus of chords, in pounds per square
inch (N/mm2).
= Staple deformation, in inches (mm) [see Table
2305.2(1)].
= Panel rigidity through the thickness, in pounds per
inch (N/mm) of panel width or depth [see Table
2305.2(2)].
= Diaphragm length, in feet (mm).
= Maximum shear due to design loads in the direction
under consideration, in pounds per linear foot (plf)
(N/mm).
= The calculated deflection, in inches (mm).
S (DcX) = Sum of individual chord-splice slip values on both
sides of the diaphragm, each multiplied by its dis-
tance to the nearest support.

L

v

D

TABLE 2305.2(1)
en VALUES (inches) FOR USE IN CALCULATING DIAPHRAGM
AND SHEAR WALL DEFLECTION DUE TO FASTENER SLIP
(Structural I)a, c

LOAD PER FASTENERb
(pounds)

FASTENER DESIGNATIONS

14-Ga staple x 2 inches long

60

80

100

120

140

160

0.011

0.018

0.028

0.04

0.053

0.068

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 4.448 N.
a. Increase en values 20 percent for plywood grades other than Structural I.
b. Load per fastener = maximum shear per foot divided by the number of fas-
teners per foot at interior panel edges.
c. Decrease en values 50 percent for seasoned lumber (moisture content < 19
percent).

➡

➡

466

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:21 AM

16

2305.3 Shear wall deflection. The deflection (D) of a blocked
wood structural panel shear wall uniformly fastened through-
out with staples is permitted to be calculated by the use of the
following equation:

D =

+

+

+

8
3vh
EAb

0 75
.

vh
Gt

he

d

h
b

n

a

(Equation 23-2)

For SI: D =

+

+

+

vh
3
EAb

vh
Gt

he
407 6.

d

h
b

n

a

3

where:
A = Area of boundary element cross section in square
inches (mm2) (vertical member at shear wall bound-
ary).
b = Wall width, in feet (mm).

da = V e r t i c a l e lo n g a t io n o f o v e r tu r n in g a n c h o r a g e
(including fastener slip, device elongation, anchor
rod elongation, etc.) at the design shear load (v).
E = Elastic modulus of boundary element (vertical mem-
ber at shear wall boundary), in pounds per square inch
(N/mm2).
en = Staple deformation, in inches (mm) [see Table
2305.2(1)].
Gt = Panel rigidity through the thickness, in pounds per
inch (N/mm) of panel width or depth [see Table
2305.2(2)].
h = Wall height, in feet (mm).
v = Maximum shear due to design loads at the top of the
wall, in pounds per linear foot (N/mm).
D = The calculated deflection, in inches (mm).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

467

WOOD

TABLE 2305.2(2)
VALUES OF Gt FOR USE IN CALCULATING DEFLECTION OF WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEAR WALLS AND DIAPHRAGMS

PANEL
TYPE

SPAN
RATING

VALUES OF Gt (lb/in. panel depth or width)

OTHER

STRUCTURAL I

3-ply
Plywood

4-ply
Plywood

5-ply
Plywooda

OSB

3-ply
Plywood

4-ply
Plywood

5-ply
Plywooda

OSB

Sheathing

24/0

25,000

32,500

37,500

77,500

32,500

42,500

41,500

77,500

24/16

27,000

35,000

40,500

83,500

35,000

45,500

44,500

83,500

32/16

27,000

35,000

40,500

83,500

35,000

45,500

44,500

83,500

40/20

28,500

37,000

43,000

88,500

37,000

48,000

47,500

88,500

48/24

31,000

40,500

46,500

96,000

40,500

52,500

51,000

96,000

Single Floor

16 o.c.

27,000

35,000

40,500

83,500

35,000

45,500

44,500

83,500

20 o.c.

28,000

36,500

42,000

87,000

36,500

47,500

46,000

87,000

24 o.c.

30,000

39,000

45,000

93,000

39,000

50,500

49,500

93,000

32 o.c.

36,000

47,000

54,000

110,000

47,000

61,000

59,500

110,000

48 o.c.

50,500

65,500

76,000

155,000

65,500

85,000

83,500

155,000

OTHER

STRUCTURAL I

Thickness
(in.)

A-A,
A-C

Marine

All Other
Grades

A-A,
A-C

Marine

All Other
Grades

Sanded
Plywood

1/4
11/32
3/8
15/32
1/2
19/32
5/8
23/32
3/4
7/8

24,000

31,000

24,000

31,000

31,000

31,000

25,500

33,000

25,500

33,000

33,000

33,000

26,000

34,000

26,000

34,000

34,000

34,000

38,000

49,500

38,000

49,500

49,500

49,500

38,500

50,000

38,500

50,000

50,000

50,000

49,000

63,500

49,000

63,500

63,500

63,500

49,500

64,500

49,500

64,500

64,500

64,500

50,500

65,500

50,500

65,500

65,500

65,500

51,000

66,500

51,000

66,500

66,500

66,500

52,500

68,500

52,500

68,500

68,500

68,500

1
11/8
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound/inch = 0.1751 N/mm.
a. Applies to plywood with five or more layers; for five-ply/three-layer plywood, use values for four ply.

73,500

95,500

73,500

95,500

95,500

95,500

75,000

97,500

75,000

97,500

97,500

97,500

➡

17

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:22 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SECTION 2306
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN
2306.1 Allowable stress design. The structural analysis and
construction of wood elements in structures using allowable
stress design shall be in accordance with the following applica-
ble standards:
American Forest & Paper Association.
NDS
National Design Specification for Wood Construction
SDPWS Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic
American Institute of Timber Construction.
AITC 104
Typical Construction Details
AITC 110
Standard Appearance Grades for Structural
Glued Laminated Timber
Standard for Dimensions of Structural Glued
Laminated Timber
Standard Specifications for Structural Glued
Laminated Timber of Softwood Species
Standard Specifications for Structural Glued
Laminated Timber of Hardwood Species

AITC 113

AITC 117

AITC 119

ANSI/
AITC A190.1 Structural Glued Laminated Timber
AITC 200
Inspection Manual
American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
ASAE EP 484.2 D iaph ragm Des ign o f Me ta l -c lad , Po s t -
Frame Rectangular Buildings
ASAE EP 486.1 Shallow Post Foundation Design
ASAE 559
Design Requirements and Bending Properties
for Mechanically Laminated Columns
APA—The Engineered Wood Association.
Panel Design Specification
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 1 -
Design & Fabrication of Plywood Curved Panel
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 2 -
Design & Fabrication of Glued Plywood-lumber Beams
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 3 -
Design & Fabrication of Plywood Stressed-skin Panels
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 4 -
Design & Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich Panels
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 5 -
Design & Fabrication of All-plywood Beams
EWS T300
Glulam Connection Details
EWS S560
Field Notching and Drilling of Glued Lami-
nated Timber Beams
EWS S475
Glued Laminated Beam Design Tables
EWS X450 Glulam in Residential Construction
EWS X440
Product and Application Guide: Glulam
EWS R540
Builders Tips: Proper Storage and Handling of
Glulam Beams

Truss Plate Institute, Inc.
TPI 1 National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected
Wood Truss Construction
2306.1.1 Joists and rafters. The design of rafter spans is
permitted to be in accordance with the AF&PA Span Tables
for Joists and Rafters.

2306.1.2 Plank and beam flooring. The design of plank
and beam flooring is permitted to be in accordance with the
AF&PA Wood Construction Data No. 4 .

2306.1.3 Treated wood stress adjustments. The allowable
unit stresses for preservative-treated wood need no adjust-
ment for treatment, but are subject to other adjustments.
The allowable unit stresses for fire-retardant-treated
wood, including fastener values, shall be developed from an
approved method of investigation that considers the effects of
anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retar-
dant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment
and the redrying process. Other adjustments are applicable
except that the impact load duration shall not apply.
2306.1.4 Lumber decking. The capacity of lumber decking
arranged according to the patterns described in Section
2304.8.2 shall be the lesser of the capacities determined for
flexure and deflection according to the formulas in Table
2306.1.4.

TABLE 2306.1.4
ALLOWABLE LOADS FOR LUMBER DECKING

PATTERN

ALLOWABLE AREA LOADa, b
Flexure
Deflection

Simple span

s
b

¢8
bF
d
l
62

=

2

s

D

D

=

¢

384
5
l

3E
d
12

4

Two-span continuous

s
b

¢8
bF
d
l
62

=

2

s

D

D

=

¢

185
l

3E
d
12

4

Combination simple- and
two-span continuous

s
b

¢8
bF
d
l
62

=

2

s

D

D

=

¢

131
l

3E
d
12

4

Cantilevered pieces intermixed s

b

20
bF
3
l

d
6

=

¢

2

2

s

D

D

=

¢

105
l

3E
d
12

4

Controlled random layup

Mechanically laminated decking s

b

20
bF
3
l

d
6

=

¢

2

2

s

D

D

=

¢

100
l

3E
d
12

4

2-inch decking

s
b

20
bF
3
l

d
6

=

¢

2

2

s

D

D

=

¢

100
l

3E
d
12

4

3-inch and 4-inch decking

s
b

20
bF
3
l

d
6

=

¢

2

2

s

D

D

=

¢

116
l

3E
d
12

4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. s
b = Allowable total uniform load limited by bending.
D = Allowable total uniform load limited by deflection.
b. d = Actual decking thickness.
l
= Span of decking.
¢Fb = Allowable bending stress adjusted by applicable factors.
¢E = Modulus of elasticity adjusted by applicable factors.

s

468

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

➡

18

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:23 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

➡

➡

➡

2306.2 Wood diaphragms.
2306.2.1 Wood structural panel diaphragms. Wood
structural panel diaphragms shall be designed and con-
structed in accordance with AF&PA SDPWS. Wood struc-
tural panel diaphragms are permitted to resist horizontal
forces using the allowable shear capacities set forth in Table
2306.2.1(1) or 2306.2.1(2). The allowable shear capacities
in Tables 2306.2.1(1) and 2306.2.1(2) are permitted to be
increased 40 percent for wind design.
2306.2.2 Single diagonally sheathed lumber dia-
phragms. Single diagonally sheathed lumber diaphragms
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
AF&PA SDPWS.
2306.2.3 Double diagonally sheathed lumber dia-
phragms. Double diagonally sheathed lumber diaphragms
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
AF&PA SDPWS.
2306.2.4 Gypsum board diaphragm ceilings. Gypsum
board diaphragm ceilings shall be in accordance with Sec-
tion 2508.5.
2306.3 Wood structural panel shear walls. Wood structural
panel shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accor-
dance with AF&PA SDPWS. Wood structural panel shear
walls are permitted to resist horizontal forces using the allow-
able capacities set forth in Table 2306.3. Allowable capacities
in Table 2306.3 are permitted to be increased 40 percent for
wind design.
2306.4 Lumber sheathed shear walls. Single and double
diagonally sheathed lumber shear walls shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with AF&PA SDPWS. Single and
double diagonally sheathed lumber walls shall not be used to
resist seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design
Category E or F.

2306.5 Particleboard shear walls. Particleboard shear walls
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AF&PA
SDPWS. Particleboard shear walls shall be permitted to resist
horizontal forces using the allowable shear capacities set forth
in Table 2306.5. Allowable capacities in Table 2306.5 are per-
m i t t e d t o b e i n c r e a s e d 4 0 p e r c e n t f o r w i n d d e s i g n .
Particleboard shall not be used to resist seismic forces in struc-
tures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
2306.6 Fiberboard shear walls. Fiberboard shear walls shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with AF&PA
SDPWS. Fiberboard shear walls are permitted to resist hori-
zontal forces using the allowable shear capacities set forth in
Table 2306.6. Allowable capacities in Table 2306.6 are permit-
ted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Fiberboard shall
not be used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

2306.7 Shear walls sheathed with other materials. Shear
walls sheathed with portland cement plaster, gypsum lath, gyp-

sum sheathing or gypsum board shall be designed and con-
structed in accordance with AF&PA SDPWS. Shear walls
sheathed with these materials are permitted to resist horizontal
forces using the allowable shear capacities set forth in Table
2306.7. Shear walls sheathed with portland cement plaster,
gypsum lath, gypsum sheathing or gypsum board shall not be
used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category E or F.

➡

SECTION 2307
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN
2307.1 Load and resistance factor design. The structural
analysis and construction of wood elements and structures
using load and resistance factor design shall be in accordance
with AF&PA NDS and AF&PA SDPWS.
2307.1.1 Wood structural panel shear walls. In Seismic
Design Category D, E or F, where shear design values
exceed 490 pounds per foot (7154 N/m), all framing mem-
bers receiving edge nailing from abutting panels shall not be
less than a single 3-inch (76 mm) nominal member or two
2-inch (51 mm) nominal members fastened together in
accordance with AF&PA NDS to transfer the design shear
value between framing members. Wood structural panel
joint and sill plate nailing shall be staggered at all panel
edges. See Sections 4.3.6.1 and 4.3.6.4.3 of AF&PA
SDPWS for sill plate size and anchorage requirements.

SECTION 2308
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION

2308.1 General. The requirements of this section are intended
for conventional light-frame construction. Other methods are
permitted to be used, provided a satisfactory design is submit-
ted showing compliance with other provisions of this code.
Interior nonload-bearing partitions, ceilings and curtain walls
of conventional light-frame construction are not subject to the
limitations of this section. Alternatively, compliance with
AF&PA WFCM shall be permitted subject to the limitations
therein and the limitations of this code. Detached one- and
two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress and their accessory
structures shall comply with the International Residential
Code.

2308.1.1 Portions exceeding limitations of conventional
construction. When portions of a building of otherwise
conventional construction exceed the limits of Section
2308.2, these portions and the supporting load path shall be
designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice
and the provisions of this code. For the purposes of this sec-
tion, the term “portions” shall mean parts of buildings con-
taining volume and area such as a room or a series of rooms.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

469

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:23 AM

19

470

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

T
T

R
U
E
O
O
L
F
S
B
A
R
O
O
O
H
C
R
R
E
A
P
L
S
R
D
F
N
U
S
O
A
P
L

1
2
6
0
3
2

.

.

(

G
N
S
D
M
A
G
O
A
R
C
H
P
A
S
D
E
S
L
E
R
N
O
A
D
P
N
L
A
R
R
U
O
C
U
E
R
N
T
1
S
P
D
N
O
R
O
E
H

)

A

L
F
L

G
R
U
A
O
E
D
H
F
S
O
E
G
L
B
N
A
A
O
R

W

(

F

)

W

T
F

I
I

W

I

T

H

M

I

I

-

,

T

I

a

W

I

M

I

L

I

h

L
E
E
D
N
A
A
R
P
G

E
L
L
D
A
P
N
A
N
A
E
N
T
S
H
G
O
T
A
R
M
G
G
O
M
N
O
E
E
C
Z
L
S

I

I

f

M

I

N
O
G
R
N
E
T
U
s
N
A
e
E
R
h
A
T
T
c
N
R
S
E
n
F
A
N
N
F
E
P

I

M

M

I

I

M

)
I

i
(

S
L
S
A
L
U
E
N
E
h
M
N
N
c
M
K
N
A
n
C
O
P
M
N
H

I

I
I

M

T

i
(
I

)

D
S
A
G
G
N
E
N
A
O
N
S
L
A
R
U
N
H
R
N
E
A
M
S
E
N
D
M
A
O
E
N
D
B
A
N
O
R
M
G
D
P
U
M
N
F
D
E
A
O
E
B

I

I
I

M

L
F

W

I

T

M

I

M

T

J

I

I

)
I

g

i
(

s
e
h
c
n

B

L

M
G
A
R
H
P
A
D
D
E
K
C
O

I

S

B
N
U

L

M
G
A
R
H
P
A
D
D
E
K
C
O

I

S

s
a
F

t

e
n
e

r

6
d
s
a
5
e
o
s
a
e
o
d
s
a
n
u
e
o
a
s
b
e
a
g
p
d
g
e
a
s
e
h
g
e
p
n
d
a
a
e
p
d
e
n
a
a
a
p
s
a
e
s
d
h
u
n
c
o
a
n
u
n
4
g
n
n
3
o
c
c
s
a
e
p
a
s
a
s

i

i
(
i
t
,

)

t

i
l
l
l

r

m

r

i
l

(

a

l
l

s
e
s
a
c

)

t

r

(
l
l

l

t

(

C

,
)

t

l

C

,

)

b

s
a
F

t

e
n
e

r

s

6
d
e
c
a
p
s

²

m

x
a

.

a

t

o
p
p
u
s

t
r

s
e
g
d
e
d
e

b

6

4

2

1

/

c
2

2

c

C

s
s
e
g
n
d
d
o
e
a
o
d
s
1
e
u
o
e
k
o
s
c
u
a
o
n
e
b
n
a
n
o
u
a
c
p
o
o

(

N

l
l
i
l
t

r

j

)
i

t

r

l

t

l

A

l
,
l
i
f

o
u
3
g
2
n
o
s
e
c
s
a

t
r

6
d
s
n
n
a
o
5
e
h
a
4

r

i
t
,

(

C

,

)

s
a
F

t

e
n
e

r

e
h
4
o
d
n
a
a
3
s
e
2
h
c
1
n
s
e
s
g
a
n
c
a
p
s

i

i
(

)

t

t

r
b
)

e
n
a
p

l

s
e
g
d
e

(

C

,

,

6

6

4

3

S

r
t
r

u
d

s
c
e

t

u

r

a

l

I

g

a

d
8

(

2

2
/
1

²

1
3
1
0
´

.

)

1

8
/
3

8
/
3

2

0
7
2

0
6
3

0
3
5

0
0
6

0
4
2

0
8
1

3

0
0
3

0
0
4

0
0
6

5
7
6

5
6
2

0
0
2

1

2
/
1

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

5
7
1

5
3
2

0
5
3

0
0
4

5
5
1

5
1
1

3

0
0
2

5
6
2

5
9
3

0
5
4

5
7
1

0
3
1

d
0
1

d

(

3

²

8
4
1
0
´

.

²

)

1

2
/
1

2
3
/
5
1

2

0
2
3

5
2
4

0
4
6

0
3
7

5
8
2

5
1
2

3

0
6
3

0
8
4

0
2
7

0
2
8

0
2
3

0
4
2

1

2
/
1

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

5
7
1

5
3
2

0
5
3

0
0
4

5
5
1

0
2
1

3

0
0
2

5
6
2

5
9
3

0
5
4

5
7
1

0
3
1

S

n
d
g
d
n
n
h
o
1
v
2
g
d
o
n
n
h
o
d
o
h

a
e

r
t

i

,

s

i
t
r

l
r
i

e

l
f
r

c
a
s
e

e
e
a

g

a

e

C
O
D

S
S
P
P

d
6

e

(

2

²

3
1
1
0
´

.

)

1

4
/
1

8
/
3

2

5
8
1

0
5
2

5
7
3

0
2
4

5
6
1

5
2
1

3

0
1
2

0
8
2

0
2
4

5
7
4

5
8
1

0
4
1

2

0
4
2

0
2
3

0
8
4

5
4
5

5
1
2

0
6
1

3

0
7
2

0
6
3

0
4
5

0
1
6

0
4
2

0
8
1

1

2
/
1

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

0
6
1

0
1
2

5
1
3

0
6
3

0
4
1

5
0
1

3

0
8
1

5
3
2

5
5
3

0
0
4

0
6
1

0
2
1

d
8

(

2

2
/
1

²

1
3
1
0
´

.

²

)

1

8
/
3

6
1
/
7

2

5
5
2

0
4
3

5
0
5

5
7
5

0
3
2

0
7
1

3

5
8
2

0
8
3

0
7
5

5
4
6

5
5
2

0
9
1

1

2
/
1

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

5
6
1

5
2
2

5
3
3

0
8
3

0
5
1

0
1
1

3

0
9
1

0
5
2

5
7
3

5
2
4

5
6
1

5
2
1

d
8

(

2

2
/
1

²

1
3
1
0
´

.

²

)

1

8
/
3

2
3
/
5
1

2

0
7
2

0
6
3

0
3
5

0
0
6

0
4
2

0
8
1

3

0
0
3

0
0
4

0
0
6

5
7
6

5
6
2

0
0
2

d
0
1

d

(

3

²

8
4
1
0
´

.

²

)

1

2
/
1

2

0
9
2

5
8
3

5
7
5

5
5
6

5
5
2

0
9
1

3

5
2
3

0
3
4

0
5
6

5
3
7

0
9
2

5
1
2

1

2
/
1

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

0
6
1

0
1
2

5
1
3

0
6
3

0
4
1

5
0
1

3

0
8
1

5
3
2

5
5
3

5
0
4

0
6
1

0
2
1

d
0
1

d

(

3

²

8
4
1
0
´

.

²

)

1

2
/
1

2
3
/
9
1

2

0
2
3

5
2
4

0
4
6

0
3
7

5
8
2

5
1
2

3

0
6
3

0
8
4

0
2
7

0
2
8

0
2
3

0
4
2

1

4
/
3

6
1

G

a

g

e

1

2

5
7
1

5
3
2

0
5
3

0
0
4

5
5
1

5
1
1

3

0
0
2

5
6
2

5
9
3

0
5
4

5
7
1

0
3
1

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

➡

➡

20

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:25 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2306.2.1(1)—continued
ALLOWABLE SHEAR (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL
PANEL DIAPHRAGMS WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH,
OR SOUTHERN PINEa FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADINGh

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of lumber in AF&PA NDS. (2) For staples find shear value from table above for Structural I
panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species. (3) For nails find
shear value from table above for nail size for actual grade and multiply value by the following adjustment factor: Specific Gravity Adjustment Factor = [1-(0.5 -
SG)], where SG = Specific Gravity of the framing lumber. This adjustment factor shall not be greater than 1.
b. Space fasteners maximum 12 inches o.c. along intermediate framing members (6 inches o.c. where supports are spaced 48 inches o.c.).
c. Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 3 inches nominal or wider, and nails at all panel edges shall be staggered where panel edge nailing is specified at 21/2
inches o.c. or less.
d. Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 3 inches nominal or wider, and nails at all panel edges shall be staggered where both of the following conditions are met:
(1) 10d nails having penetration into framing of more than 11/2 inches and (2) panel edge nailing is specified at 3 inches o.c. or less.
e. 8d is recommended minimum for roofs due to negative pressures of high winds.
f. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.
g. The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or adjoining panel edges shall be 2 inches.
h. For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the AF&PA NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

471

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:27 AM

21

472

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

TABLE 2306.2.1(2)
ALLOWABLE SHEAR (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS
UTILIZING MULTIPLE ROWS OF FASTENERS (HIGH LOAD DIAPHRAGMS) WITH FRAMING OF
DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINEa FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADINGb, g, h

PANEL
GRADEc

COMMON
NAIL SIZE OR
STAPLEf
GAGE

MINIMUM
FASTENER
PENETRATION
IN FRAMING
(inches)

MINIMUM
NOMINAL
PANEL
THICKNESS
(inch)

MINIMUM
NOMINAL
WIDTH OF
FRAMING
MEMBER AT
ADJOINING
PANEL EDGES
AND
BOUNDARIESe

LINES OF
FASTENERS

BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS

Cases 1 and 2d

Fastener Spacing Per Line at Boundaries
(inches)

4

21/2
Fastener Spacing Per Line at Other Panel Edges
(inches)

2

6

4

4

3

3

2

Structural I
grades

10d
common nails

11/2

15/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

605
700
875

815
915
1,220

875
1,005
1,285

1,150
1,290
1,395

—
—
—

—
—
—

19/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

670
780
965

880
990
1,320

965
1,110
1,405

1,255
1,440
1,790

—
—
—

—
—
—

23/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

730
855
1,050

955
1,070
1,430

1,050
1,210
1,525

1,365
1,565
1,800

—
—
—

—
—
—

14 gage
staples

2

15/32

3
4

2
3

600
860

600
900

860
1,160

960
1,295

1,060
1,295

1,200
1,400

19/32

3
4

2
3

600
875

600
900

875
1,175

960
1,440

1,075
1,475

1,200
1,795

Sheathing single
floor and other
grades covered in
DOC PS 1 and
PS 2

10d
common nails

11/2

15/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

525
605
765

725
815
1,085

765
875
1,130

1,010
1,105
1,195

—
—
—

—
—
—

19/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

650
755
935

860
965
1,290

935
1,080
1,365

1,225
1,370
1,485

—
—
—

—
—
—

23/32

3
4
4

2
2
3

710
825
1,020

935
1,050
1,400

1,020
1,175
1,480

1,335
1,445
1,565

—
—
—

—
—
—

14 gage
staples

2

15/32

3
4

2
3

540
735

540
810

735
1,005

865
1,105

915
1,105

1,080
1,195

19/32

3
4

2
3

600
865

600
900

865
1,130

960
1,430

1,065
1,370

1,200
1,485

23/32

4

3

865

900

1,130

1,490

1,430

1,545

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of framing lumber in AF&PA NDS. (2) For staples, find shear value from table above for Struc-
tural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species. (3) For nails,
find shear value from table above for nail size of actual grade and multiply value by the following adjustment factor: Specific Gravity Adjustment Factor = [ 1- (0.5
- SG)], where SG = Specific gravity of the framing lumber. This adjustment factor shall not be greater than 1.
b. Fastening along intermediate framing members: Space fasteners a maximum of 12 inches on center, except 6 inches on center for spans greater than 32 inches.
c. Panels conforming to PS 1 or PS 2.
d. This table gives shear values for Cases 1 and 2 as shown in Table 2306.2.1(1). The values shown are applicable to Cases 3, 4, 5 and 6 as shown in Table 2306.2.1(1),
providing fasteners at all continuous panel edges are spaced in accordance with the boundary fastener spacing.
e. The minimum nominal depth of framing members shall be 3 inches nominal. The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or
adjoining panel edges shall be 2 inches.
f. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch, and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.
g. High load diaphragms shall be subject to special inspection in accordance with Section 1704.6.1.
h. For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the AF&PA NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

22

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:27 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 2306.2.1(2)—continued
ALLOWABLE SHEAR (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS
UTILIZING MULTIPLE ROWS OF FASTENERS (HIGH LOAD DIAPHRAGMS) WITH FRAMING OF
DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINE FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING

WOOD

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

473

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:32 AM

23

474

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

F
T

S
G
L
N
L
D
A
A
O
R
A
C
E
H
S
S
L
E
E
S
N
R
A
O
P
L
D
A
N
R
U
R
C
O
U
R
T
E
S
N
3
6
D
P
0
O
3
N
O
2
R
E
E
L
H
R
B
O
A
U
O

.

A

L
L
F

M
O
A
R

W

O
B
G
A
N

R
G
A
U
E
O
H
D
S
F
E
L

(

S
T
O
R
O
O
H
R
C
E
R
P
A
S
L
D
R
N
U
F
O
S
P
A
L

F

)

W

T

W

W

I

T

H

I

I

-

T

I

a

F

W

I

I

M

I

L

I

b

,

h

,

,
i

,
j

l

L
E
N
A
P

E
D
A
R
G

M

I

N

I

M

A
N
S
S
M
E
O
N
N
K
C
U
H

M

I

L
E
N
A
P
h
c
L
n

T

I

i
(

)

M

I

R
E
N
s
N
e
E
h
N
T
c
O
S
n
A
T
A
F
G
R
N
T
U
E
N
A
E
R
N
P
F

I

M

M

I
i
(

I

M

I

)

C
E
R
D
D
E
L
P
P
A
S
L
E
N
A
P

I

I

T
T

O

F

A
R

M

I

G
N

O
D
E
L
P
P
A
S
L
E
N
A
P

I

R
E
V

2
/
1

²

R
O

8
/
5

²

G

U
S
P
Y

M

A
E
H
S

T

G
N
H

I

A
N

I

L

(

o
c

m
m

n
a
e
v
z
a
s
g
e
o
p
a
n
s
o

r

l
i

i

x
o
b
d
e
z

)

o

r

t

l

k

s
a
F

t

e
n
e

r

a
g
n
c
a
p
s

i

t

e
n
a
p

l

s
e
g
d
e

i
(

s
e
h
c
n

)

A
N

I

L

(

o
c

m
m

n
a
e
v
z
a
s
g
e
o
p
a
n
s
o

r

l
i

i

x
o
b
d
e
z

)

o

r

t

l

k

s
a
F

t

e
n
e

r

a
g
n
c
a
p
s

i

t

e
n
a
p

l

s
e
g
d
e

i
(

s
e
h
c
n

)

6

4

3

2

e

6

4

3

2

e

g
a
n
u
h
c
a
u
e
h
S

r
t

t
t

r
i

l

I

s

3

/

8

1

3

/

8

d
8
2

(

2

1

/

²
2

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
1
3
a
1
g
0
3
´
1
1
0
´

.

²

m
m

,

1

/

²
2

.

²

l

i

)

0
3
2

d

0
6
3

d

0
6
4

d

0
1
6

d

d
0
1
3

(

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
c
n
a
8
v
4
a
1
g
0
8
´
2
1
3
0
´

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
2

0
3
4

0
5
5

f

0
3
7

1

1

1

/

2

6
1

G

e
g
a

5
5
1

5
3
2

5
1
3

0
0
4

6
1
2

G

e
g
a

5
5
1

5
3
2

0
1
3

0
0
4

7

/

6
1

1

3

/

8

d
8
2

(

2

1

/

²
2

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
1
3
a
1
g
0
3
´
1
1
0
´

.

²

m
m

,

1

/

²
2

.

²

l

i

)

5
5
2

d

5
9
3

d

5
0
5

d

0
7
6

d

d
0
1
3

(

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
c
n
a
8
v
4
a
1
g
0
8
´
2
1
3
0
´

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
2

0
3
4

0
5
5

f

0
3
7

1

1

1

/

2

6
1

G

e
g
a

0
7
1

0
6
2

5
4
3

0
4
4

6
1
2

G

e
g
a

5
5
1

5
3
2

0
1
3

0
0
4

5
1

/

2
3

1

3

/

8

d
8
2

(

2

1

/

²
2

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
1
3
a
1
g
0
3
´
1
1
0
´

.

²

m
m

,

1

/

²
2

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
2

0
3
4

0
5
5

0
3
7

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
8
4
a
1
g
0
8
´
1
2
1
3
0
d
´
0
1
3

(

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
2

0
3
4

0
5
5

f

0
3
7

1

1

1

/

2

6
1

G

e
g
a

5
8
1

0
8
2

5
7
3

5
7
4

6
1
2

G

e
g
a

5
5
1

5
3
2

0
0
3

0
0
4

1

1

/

2

d
0
1
3

(

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
c
n
a
8
v
4
a
1
g
0
8
´
2
1
3
0
´

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

0
4
3

0
1
5

5
6
6

f

0
7
8

d
0
1
3

(

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
c
n
a
8
v
4
a
1
g
0
8
´
2
1
3
0
´

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

—

¾

—

—

g
n
d
o
s
h
o
e
p
a
e
c
e
e
y
c
h
p
x
S
S
p
e

t

i

i
,

l

w

s
r

g
5
n
p
d
u
o

i

g

t
i

G

5

/

c
6
1

o

r

1

/

c
4

1

1

/

4

d
6
2

(

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
3
1
a
1
g
0
9
´
9
0
2
0
´

²

.

²

m
m

,

²

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
1

0
7
2

0
5
3

0
5
4

d
8
2

(

2

1

/

²
2

x
n
o
o
b
d
e
z
o
n
c
a
v
1
3
a
1
g
0
3
´
1
1
0
´

.

²

m
m

,

1

/

²
2

.

²

l

i

)

0
8
1

0
7
2

0
5
3

0
5
4

1

1

1

/

2

6
1

G

e
g
a

5
4
1

0
2
2

5
9
2

5
7
3

6
1
2

G

e
g
a

0
1
1

5
6
1

0
2
2

5
8
2

5

/

c
6
1

1

1

/

4

d
6

(

2

²

9
9
0
0
´

.

²

)

0
4
1

0
1
2

5
7
2

0
6
3

d
8

(

2

1

/

²
2

3
1
1
0
´

.

²

)

0
4
1

0
1
2

5
7
2

0
6
3

3

/

c
8

1

3

/

8

d
8

(

2

1

/

²
2

3
1
1
0
´

.

²

)

0
6
1

0
4
2

0
1
3

0
1
4

d
0
1

(

3

²

8
2
1
0
´

.

²

)

0
6
1

0
4
2

0
1
3

f

0
1
4

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

h
c
n

=

4
5
2

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

f

o
o

t

=

9
3
9
5
4
1

.

m
N

/

.

a

.

c
2
e
8
o
p
F
0
S

s
c
r
i
a
o
f
r
f
i
f
r

m

i

o
s
f
e
o
v
i
c
a
g
e
n
p

t

y
e
a
v
e
S
a
g
g
5
c
o
0
2
4
c
1
e
0
p
o
d
y
n
o
F
v
c
a
a
1
F
g
(
:
c
n
s
i
e
f
e
i
i
c
c
e
e
s
p
p
u
s
s
h
r
d
e
t
i
h

)
r

r
t
i
i
t

[
f
s

i
f
i

r
r

f
r
]
)
t
t
i

a
o
r
o
s
e
f
S
i
5
c
e
6
e
p
0
e
h
o
o

s
r
r

l
l
l
f

e
e
b
h
c
e
p
o
u
S
=

m

s
v
e
a
c
e
n
p
i
c
s
i
r
r
f
i

A

F

&

2
a
n
S
e
h
o
F
o
3
y
P

D
N
A

.

i
i
f
)
s
a
l
i
r
(
f

d
g
o
n
n
F

r
s
s
f
i
e
h
d
u
n
l
i
a
.
f
v
e
s
e
r
b
a
l
p
e
a
h
u
s
s
r

t

d
a
a
e
o
h

r

b
o
o
a
c
e
a
v
o
o
b
n
a
e
e
e
u
b
a
s
a
v
u

l
l
t

r
f

m

f
t
t

d
e
n
n
1
a
a
n
p
e
a
d
h
a
a
g
e
u
a
a
c
u
e
u
c
g
a
S
e
o
b
o
e
o
e
z
n
v
o
b
a
a
a
h
n
e
s
l
r
r

r
r
f
f
t

t
r
r
t

r
l
t
t

I
l
r
t
r

l

r
(
s

s
a
s
e
v
d
y
p
a
g
e
u

l
r

l

e
d
o
a
o
g
e
a
h
u
c
y
a
b
e
o
u

f

t
t

f
l

l
l
r

i
)

u
u
d
a
d
n
g
a
n

m

i
t
t
l

y
b
o
e
c
u
a
a
v
n
y
e
p

l

l
f
t

.

A
w

.

-
r

,
,

.

t

i
r

(
t
.
i

f
)

r

m

t
j

i
l
l
l
i

s

m

i
t
l

l

w

j

s

m

t

:
r

G

r

t
i

y

j

t

m

t

=

(
-

.

G

w

r

G

G

t

m

l

m

r

T

m

t

f

.

b

.

e
a
n
s
a
n
P

l
l
l

s
o
e
n
h
c
h
n
c
n
4
2
2
h
d
e
c
a
p
d
s
e
k
s
d
c
u
a
b
s
s
n
e
o
g
d
d
e
e

w

t
i

i
-

m

i

e
n
o
e
c
a
n
n
o

l

t
r

w

i
.
r

o
e
F
d

r
f
r
r

d
n
n
o
g
c
n
e
h
a
o

m

r
i

.

I

s

l
l
i
t
t
i

e
e
h
n
a
e
p
s
d
e
n
n
a
a
p
s
n
o
a

l

t
i

t
r
l

s
a
s
n
s
o
e
z
n
k
c
o
h
h

i
r

l
l
,
t

i
t
t
s
r
a
e
v
e
c
o
a
y
p

r

y
e
a
n
c
e

s
r
l
l

.

e
c
x
a
a
p
S

f

s
a
u

t

e
2
n
1
e

s
i
r

m

s
x
e
a
h
c
n

i

m

s
e
n
h
o
c
n
e
6
n
e
c
u
n
o

m

i
t

s
r
e
t
r
t
o
n
p
p
g
u
n
o
e
a
a
e
d
n
e
e
c
e
n
o
n

t

r
i

l
t

i

m

a
d
e

i

t

e

r
f

a

m

i

g
n

m

e

m

e
b

f
s
r

o

r

i
-
8
/
3

d
n
a
h
c
n

i
-
6
1
/
7

e
n
a
p
h
c
n

l

s

i

t

t

i

t

i

f

m

i

m

m

r

i

t

r

m

s

.

c

.

i
-
t
8
/
3
i

s
s
e
e
n
n
k
a
c
p
h
h
c
e
n
h

l

t

s
e
n
r
o
a
p
s
s
e
e
h
n
k
c
o
h

i

i
l

d

i

s
g
a
e
n

w

t
r
i

o
o
g
n
n
o
a
p
e
n
h
a
p
s
a
a
d
h
e

r

i
i
t

f
f

6
a
1
n

i
l
i
i

s
e
g
h
c
n
n

n
e
c
n
o

t

e

r

i

s

t

e
h

m

i

n

i

m

u

m

r

o
c
e

m
m

d
e
d
n
e

w

e
h

r

p
p
a
e

i
l

d
d
e

r
i

c
e

l
t

y

t

o

r
f

a

m

i

x
e
s
a
g
n

t

e

i
r

o

s
r

i

d

i

g
n

.

o
F

r

g

r

e
n
a
p
d
e
v
o
o

l

s

i

d

i

g
n

,

t

o
n
e
h

m

i

a
n

l

e
n
a
p

l

t

h

i

s
s
e
n
k
c

s

t

i

f

t

m

u

t

t

t

.

d

.

w
m
A

l
l
i

a
s
v
s
r
s
a
o
e
h
c
a
s
e
n
o
b
a
s
n
e
o

l

l
t

a
s
s
d
e
u
u

r

e
p
e

r

m

t
t
i

d
e

t

e
b
o

i

c
n

r

d
e
s
a
e

t

a
v
o

l

s
s
e
u

o
h

w

n

f

o

r

i
-
2
3
/
5
1

h
c
n

s

a
e
h

t

h

i

g
n

w

t
i

h

a
s

m

a
n
e

i
l
i

p
g
n

r

v
o

i

d
e
d

(

a

s
)

t

d
u

a
s

r

s
e

a
d
e
c
a
p

m

x
a

i

m

u

m

o

f

6
1

i

s
e
h
c
n

n
e
c
n
o

t

e

r

,

o

r

(

b

)

e
n
a
p

l

a
s

r

p
p
a
e

i
l

d
e

w

t
i

h

l

g
n
o

d

i

r

.

e

.

F

r

a

m

i

a
g
n

t

d
a

j

o

i

n

i

e
n
a
p
g
n

l

s
e
g
d
e

s

a
h

l
l

3
e
b

i

s
e
h
c
n

o
n

m

i

a
n

l

o

r

w

i

e
d

r

,

a
n
d
n
a

l
i

s

a

t

a

l
l

e
n
a
p

l

s
e
g
d
e

s

a
h

l
l

e
b

s

t

e
g
g
a

r

d
e

w

e
h

r

e
n
a
p
e

l

a
n
e
g
d
e

i
l
i

g
n

i

s

s

c
e
p

i
f
i

a
d
e

t

2

i

s
e
h
c
n

n
e
c
n
o

t

e

r

o

r

l

s
s
e

.

f

.

F

r
r
f

a
a

m
m

i
i

a
o
g
g
n
n

t
f

e
n
a
1
p
n
g
a
n
h
n
e
o
o
d
a

i
r
j

i
t

i
l

d
a
n
h
a
s
s
s
e
e
g
h
d
c
e
n

(
l
l

o
g
n
a
n
a
n
o
e
n
g
s
d
e
e
h
c
e
n
n
a
3
p
e
b
2

i

m

l
i
l
i
i

i
r

w

i

a
a
n
d
d
e
n
a
c
e
e
p
d

r

i
f
i
,

l
i
t

r
s
s
r
e
e
g
d
n
e
e
c
e
n
n
o
a
p
s
e
h
a
c
n
a
s

t

l
l

l

s
e
b
s
s
e
a
h
o

l
l
l

t

e
g
g
a

r

d
e

w

e
h

r

o
b
e

t

o
h

t
f

e
h

f

o

l
l

o

w

i

d
n
o
c
g
n

i
t
i

n
o

a
s

r

e

m

e

(
:
t

1

)

d
0
1

(

3

²

8
4
1
0
´

.

²

)

a
n

l
i

s

v
a
h

i

e
n
e
p
g
n

r
t

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

t

o

m

r
2
/
1

)

l

s

s

3

i

t

.

g

.

V

a

l

s
e
u

p
p
a

l

y

t

a
o

-
l
l

e
e
n
e
v

p

l

y

w

d
o
o

.

T

h

i

s
s
e
n
k
c

a

t

o
p

i

n

t

o

f

f

s
a

t

n
e

i

e
n
a
p
n
o
g
n

l

s
e
g
d
e

e
v
o
g

r

n

s

s

a
e
h

r

a
v

l

s
e
u

.

h

.

W

e
d
h
a

r
j

h
a
o
n
b
d
n
n
o
a
d
s
e
e
g
p
d
p
e
a
e
e
n
a
a
p
s
g
e
n
n
a
p
n
e
o

l

r

i
l

t

a
e
n
a
a
p
o
a
s
e
c
a
a
s
f
l
i

f
l
l

w

l
l
l

6
n
a
h
d
s
e
s
r
e
e
g
s
g
a
g
n
e
c
b
a
p
s
a
h
a
s
n
s
d
e
g
n
a
d
e

l
i

i

i

l

t

i

s
e
h
c
n

c
o

.

.

e
n
o

t
i

e
h

s
r

i

e
d

,

e
n
a
p

l

j

o

i

n

t

s
s

a
h

l
l

o
e
b

e
s
f
f

t

t

o

f

a

l
l

d
n
o

f
f
i

e

r

n
e

r
f
t

a

m

i

g
n

m

e

m

e
b

s
r

.

O

r
f
r

a

m

i

g
n

s

a
h

l
l

3
e
b

i
-

o
n
h
c
n

m

i

a
n

l

o

t
r

h

i

e
k
c

r

a

t

i

i

l

t

l
l

s

t

.

.
i

I

a
c
o
d
e
e
s
e
b
g
e
S
g
e
a
n

i

m

i
,

w
D

s
e
o
o
g
g
n
d
e
e
h
a
c
e
n
n
n
a
g
2
p
s
o
e
a

i

C

t

r

e
e
a
S
n
y

D

,
l

E

n
o
e
b
F
c
e
o
e

r

,

w

a
p
1
e
n
6
0
3
2
e
o
p
n
o
S
d
n
c
u
e
P
o
S
p
h
S
0
5
3
e
d
c
e
n
F
e
a
c
d
x
e
o
o
s
c
e
c
3
u
a
4
n
a
6
v
n
e
3
h
g
4
s
e
d
e
g
d
n
o
a
d
a
1
e
e
h
n
6
s
e
3
e
s
4
r
a
e
f
s
h
s
r

t
r

i
t

l

s

r

i
l

a
a
n
e
g
n
e
d
e
e
s
g
n
n
e
e
b
v
e
e
u
e
c
e
a
r
u
v
q
s
r
r
e
a
e
e
b
h
e
g
s
a
e
n
g
o
h
g
s
c
e
n
n
d
a
e
h
d
a
t
n
r
f
r
a
e
l
l
f
e
a
s
z
n
a
s
o
r
e
o
t
t
f
o
a
r
t
l

,
t

m

i

m

m

i

i

i
i
l
i

g
g
n
n

r
f

o
e

m
m

u
b
e
a
b

i
t
t
.

a
a
h
u
s
c
s
u
e
n
s
a
d
p
o
g
o
n

l
r
t

l
l
l
r

e
b
e
n
o
a
n
p

t

l
j

s
n
s
e
o

t
t

s
a
s
n
d
a
n
h
a

i
l
l
i

a
h
o
n
g
h
n
c
n
a
3
n
e
e
a
g
n
p

t
l

i
l
i
i
-

m

l
i
l

e
a
b
n

l

m

m

r
r

t
t
r

i
-

m

.
i

m

m

t
.

.
i
r

r
f

w
A

t
i

i
t

.
l
l
i

i

r
l
i

t
t

w

r
f

m

m

s
r

W

t

l

i

l

s

s

t

l
l

l

S

i
t

.

.

.

.

.

A

&

P

D

W

f

r

s

i

r

r

m

.

.
j

G

a

l

n
a
v

i

a
n
d
e
z

l
i

s

s

a
h

l
l

o
h
e
b

t

d

i

o
d
e
p
p

r

t

u

m

b

l

d
e

.

k

.

S

t

p
a

l

s
e

s

a
h

l
l

e
v
a
h

a

m

i

n

i

m

u

m

c

r

o

w

n

w

i

d

t

o
h

f

i
t
6
1
r
/
7

i

d
n
a
h
c
n

s

a
h

l
l

e
b

i

n

s

t

a

l
l

d
e

w

t
i

h

t

e
h

r
i

c

r

o

w

n

s

a
p

r

a

l
l

e

l

t

o

t

e
h

l

d
g
n
o

i

m

n
e

s

i

o
n
o

f

t

e
h

r
f

a

m

i

g
n

m

e

m

e
b

s
r

.

.
l

o
F

r

s

a
e
h

r

l

d
a
o

s

o

f

o
n

r

m

a

l

o

r

e
p

r

m

n
e
n
a

t

l

u
d
d
a
o

a

s
a
n
o

e
d

i
f

y
b
d
e
n

t

e
h

A

F

&

P

D
N
A

S

,

t

a
v
e
h

l

s
e
u

i

n

t

e
h

t

b
a

l

e

e
v
o
b
a

s

a
h

l
l

e
b

m

u

i
t
l

p

i
l

o
3
6
0
y
b
d
e

.

r

6
5
0

.

,

r

s
e

c
e
p

i
t

e
v

l

y

.

➡

24

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:33 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2306.5
ALLOWABLE SHEAR FOR PARTICLEBOARD SHEAR WALL SHEATHINGb

PANELS APPLIED DIRECT TO FRAMING

PANEL GRADE

MINIMUM NOMINAL
PANEL THICKNESS
(inch)

MINIMUM NAIL
PENETRATION IN
FRAMING
(inches)

Nail size (common or
galvanized box)

M-S “Exterior Glue”
and M-2 “Exterior
Glue”

3/8

3/8

1/2

1/2

5/8

11/2

11/2

15/8

6d

8d

10d

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. Values are not permitted in Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
b. Galvanized nails shall be hot-dipped or tumbled.

Allowable shear (pounds per foot) nail spacing at
panel edges (inches)a

6

120

130

140

185

200

4

180

190

210

275

305

3

230

240

270

360

395

2

300

315

350

460

520

TABLE 2306.6
ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (plf) FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING ON
SHEAR WALLS OF FIBERBOARD SHEATHING BOARD CONSTRUCTION FOR TYPE V CONSTRUCTION ONLYa, b, c, d, e

THICKNESS AND
GRADE

FASTENER SIZE

1/2² or 25/32²

Structural

No. 11 gage galvanized
roofing nail 11/2² long for 25/32² with 3/8² head

No. 11 gage galvanized staple, 7/16² crownf

No. 11 gage galvanized staple, 1² crownf

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUE
(pounds per linear foot)
NAIL SPACING AT PANEL EDGES (inches)a

4

170

150

220

3

230

200

290

2

260

225

325

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. Fiberboard sheathing shall not be used to brace concrete or masonry walls.
b. Panel edges shall be backed with 2-inch or wider framing of Douglas fir-larch or Southern pine. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of
framing lumber in AF&PA NDS. (2) For staples, multiply the shear value from the table above by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for
all other species. (3) For nails, multiply the shear value from the table above by the following adjustment factor: specific gravity adjustment factor = [1-(0.5-SG)],
where SG = Specific gravity of the framing lumber.
c. Values shown are for fiberboard sheathing on one side only with long panel dimension either parallel or perpendicular to studs.
d. Fastener shall be spaced 6 inches on center along intermediate framing members.
e. Values are not permitted in Seismic Design Category D, E or F.
f. Staple length shall not be less than 11/2 inches for 25/32-inch sheathing or 11/4 inches for 1/2-inch sheathing.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

475

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:33 AM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2306.7
ALLOWABLE SHEAR FOR WIND OR SEISMIC FORCES FOR SHEAR WALLS OF LATH
AND PLASTER OR GYPSUM BOARD WOOD FRAMED WALL ASSEMBLIES

TYPE OF MATERIAL

THICKNESS
OF MATERIAL

WALL
CONSTRUCTION

FASTENER SPACINGb
MAXIMUM (inches)

SHEAR VALUEa, e
(plf)

MINIMUM
FASTENER SIZEc, d, j, k

1. Expanded metal or woven wire
lath and portland cement plaster

7/8²

2. Gypsum lath, plain or perforated
with vertical joints staggered

3. Gypsum lath, plain or perforated

3/8² lath and
1/2² plaster

3/8² lath and
1/2² plaster

4. Gypsum board, gypsum veneer
base or water-resistant gypsum
backing board

1/2²

5/8²

Unblocked

Unblocked

Unblocked

Unblockedf

Unblockedf

Unblocked

Unblocked

Blockedg

Blockedg

Unblocked

Blockedg

Blockedf, g

Blockedg

Blockedg

Unblockedf

Blockedg

6

5

5

7

4

7

4

7

4

8/12h

4/16h

4/12h

8/12h

6/12h

7

4

7

4

Blockedg
Two-ply

Base ply: 9
Face ply: 7

Unblocked

Blockedg

8/12h

8/12h

No. 11 gage 11/2² long, 7/16² head
No. 16 gage galv. staple, 7/8² legs

No. 13 gage galv. 11/8² long, 19/64²
head, plasterboard nail

No. 16 gage galv. staple, 11/8² long,
0.120² nail, min. 3/8² head, 11/4 ²
long

5d cooler (15/8² × 0.086²) or
wallboard 0.120² nail, min. 3/8 ²
head, 11/2 ² long
No. 16 gage galv. staple, 11/2² long

No. 6—11/4² screwsi

6d cooler (17/8² × 0.092²) or
wallboard
0.120² nail, min. 3/8² head, 13/4² long
No. 16 gage galv. staple, 11/2² legs,
15/8² long

Base ply-6d cooler (17/8² ´ 0.092²)
or wallboard 13/4² × 0.120² nail,
min. 3/8² head 15/8² 16 gage galv.
staple
15/8² 16 gage galv. staple
Face ply-8d cooler (23/8² ´ 0.113²)
or wallboard
0.120² nail, min. 3/8² head, 23/8² long
No. 15 gage galv. staple, 21/4² long

No. 6—11/4² screwsi

180

180

100

75

110

100

125

125

150

60

160

155

70

90

115

145

145

175

250

70

90

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. These shear walls shall not be used to resist loads imposed by masonry or concrete walls (see Section 4.1.5 of AF & PA SDPWS). Values shown are for short-term
loading due to wind or seismic loading. Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7. Values shown shall be reduced
25 percent for normal loading.
b. Applies to fastening at studs, top and bottom plates and blocking.
c. Alternate fasteners are permitted to be used if their dimensions are not less than the specified dimensions. Drywall screws are permitted to substitute for the 5d
(15/8² ´ 0.086²), and 6d (17/8² ´ 0.092²)(cooler) nails listed above, and No. 6 11/4 inch Type S or W screws for 6d (17/8² ´ 0.092) (cooler) nails.
d. For properties of cooler nails, see ASTM C 514.
e. Except as noted, shear values are based on a maximum framing spacing of 16 inches on center.
f. Maximum framing spacing of 24 inches on center.
g. All edges are blocked, and edge fastening is provided at all supports and all panel edges.
h. First number denotes fastener spacing at the edges; second number denotes fastener spacing at intermediate framing members.
i. Screws are Type W or S.
j. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch, measured outside the legs, and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the fram-
ing members.
k. Staples for the attachment of gypsum lath and woven-wire lath shall have a minimum crown width of 3/4 inch, measured outside the legs.

476

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:33 AM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2308.2 Limitations. Buildings are permitted to be constructed
in accordance with the provisions of conventional light-frame
construction, subject to the following limitations, and to fur-
ther limitations of Sections 2308.11 and 2308.12.

1. Buildings shall be limited to a maximum of three stories
above grade plane. For the purposes of this section, for
buildings in Seismic Design Category D or E as deter-
mined in Section 1613, cripple stud walls shall be con-
sidered to be a story.
Exception: Solid blocked cripple walls not exceeding
14 inches (356 mm) in height need not be considered a
story.

2. Maximum floor-to-floor height shall not exceed 11 feet,
7 inches (3531 mm). Bearing wall height shall not
exceed a stud height of 10 feet (3048 mm).
3. Loads as determined in Chapter 16 shall not exceed the
following:
3.1. Average dead loads shall not exceed 15 psf (718
N/m2) for combined roof and ceiling, exterior
walls, floors and partitions.
Exceptions:

1. Sub jec t to th e l im i ta t ion s o f Sec t ion s
2308.11.2 and 2308.12.2, stone or masonry
veneer up to the lesser of 5 inches (127 mm)
thick or 50 psf (2395 N/m2) and installed in
accordance with Chapter 14 is permitted to a
he igh t o f 30 fee t (9144 mm ) above a
noncombustible foundation, with an addi-
tional 8 feet (2438 mm) permitted for gable
ends.
2. Concrete or masonry fireplaces, heaters and
chimneys shall be permitted in accordance
with the provisions of this code.
3.2. Live loads shall not exceed 40 psf (1916 N/m2)
for floors.
3.3. Ground snow loads shall not exceed 50 psf (2395
N/m2).
4. Wind speeds shall not exceed 100 miles per hour (mph)
(44 m/s) (3-second gust).
Exception: Wind speeds shall not exceed 110 mph
(48.4 m/s) (3-second gust) for buildings in Exposure
Category B that are not located in a hurricane-prone
region.

5. Roof trusses and rafters shall not span more than 40 feet
(12 192 mm) between points of vertical support.
6. The use of the provisions for conventional light-frame
construction in this section shall not be permitted for
Occupancy Category IV buildings assigned to Seismic
Design Category B, C, D, E or F, as determined in Sec-
tion 1613.
7. Conventional light-frame construction is limited in
irregular structures in Seismic Design Category D or E,
as specified in Section 2308.12.6.

WOOD

2308.2.1 Basic wind speed greater than 100 mph (3-sec-
ond gust). Where the basic wind speed exceeds 100 mph
(3-second gust), the provisions of either AF&PA WFCM or
ICC 600 are permitted to be used.
2308.2.2 Buildings in Seismic Design Category B, C, D or

E. Buildings of conventional light-frame construction in
Seismic Design Category B or C, as determined in Section
1613, shall comply with the additional requirements in Sec-
tion 2308.11.
Buildings of conventional light-frame construction in
Seismic Design Category D or E, as determined in Section
1613, shall comply with the additional requirements in Sec-
tion 2308.12.
2308.3 Braced wall lines. Buildings shall be provided with
exterior and interior braced wall lines as described in Section
2308.9.3 and installed in accordance with Sections 2308.3.1
through 2308.3.4.
2308.3.1 Spacing. Spacing of braced wall lines shall not
exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm) o.c. in both the longitudinal and
transverse directions in each story.
2308.3.2 Braced wall line connections. Wind and seismic
lateral forces shall be transferred from the roofs and floors
to braced wall lines and from the braced wall lines in upper
stories to the braced wall lines in the story below in accor-
dance with is section.
Braced wall line top plates shall be fastened to joists, raf-
ters or full-depth blocking above in accordance with Table
2304.9.1, Items 11, 12, 15 or 19 as applicable based on the
orientation of the joists or rafters to the braced wall line.
Braced wall line bottom plates shall be connected to joists or
blocking below in accordance with Table 2304.9.1, Item 6,
or to foundations in accordance with Section 2308.3.3. At
exterior gable end walls, braced wall panel sheathing in the
top story shall be extended and fastened to roof framing
where the spacing between parallel exterior braced wall
lines is greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm).
Exception: Where roof trusses are used and are installed
perpendicular to an exterior braced wall line, lateral
forces shall be transferred from the roof diaphragm to the
braced wall by blocking of the ends of the trusses or by
other approved methods providing equivalent lateral
force transfer. Blocking shall be a minimum of 2 inches
(51 mm) nominal in thickness and equal to the depth of
the truss at the wall line and shall be fastened to the
braced wall line top plate as specified in Table 2304.9.1,
Item 11.
2308.3.3 Sill anchorage. Where foundations are required
by Section 2308.3.4, braced wall line sills shall be anchored
to concrete or masonry foundations. Such anchorage shall
conform to the requirements of Section 2308.6 except that
such anchors shall be spaced at not more than 4 feet (1219
mm) o.c. for structures over two stories above grade plane.
The anchors shall be distributed along the length of the
braced wall line. Other anchorage devices having equivalent
capacity are permitted.
2308.3.3.1 Anchorage to all-wood foundations. Where
all-wood foundations are used, the force transfer from

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

477

23_ibc_2009pg477.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:54:24 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

the braced wall lines shall be determined based on calcu-
lation and shall have a capacity greater than or equal to
the connections required by Section 2308.3.3.
2308.3.4 Braced wall line support. Braced wall lines shall
be supported by continuous foundations.
Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimen-
sion not over 50 feet (15 240 mm), continuous founda-
tions are required at exterior walls only.
2308.4 Design of elements. Combining of engineered ele-
ments or systems and conventionally specified elements or sys-
tems is permitted subject to the following limits:
2308.4.1 Elements exceeding limitations of conven-
tional construction. When a building of otherwise con-
ventional
construction contains
structural
elements
exceeding the limits of Section 2308.2, these elements and
the supporting load path shall be designed in accordance
with accepted engineering practice and the provisions of
this code.
2308.4.2 Structural elements or systems not described
herein. When a building of otherwise conventional con-
struction contains structural elements or systems not
described in Section 2308, these elements or systems shall
be designed in accordance with accepted engineering
practice and the provisions of this code. The extent of such
design need only demonstrate compliance of
the
nonconventional elements with other applicable provi-
sions of this code and shall be compatible with the perfor-
mance of the conventionally framed system.
2308.5 Connections and fasteners. Connections and fasten-
ers used in conventional construction shall comply with the
requirements of Section 2304.9.
2308.6 Foundation plates or sills. Foundations and footings
shall be as specified in Chapter 18. Foundation plates or sills
resting on concrete or masonry foundations shall comply with
Section 2304.3.1. Foundation plates or sills shall be bolted or
anchored to the foundation with not less than 1/2-inch-diameter
(12.7 mm) steel bolts or approved anchors spaced to provide
equivalent anchorage as the steel bolts. Bolts shall be embed-
ded at least 7 inches (178 mm) into concrete or masonry, and
spaced not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) apart. There shall be a
minimum of two bolts or anchor straps per piece with one bolt
or anchor strap located not more than 12 inches (305 mm) or
less than 4 inches (102 mm) from each end of each piece. A
properly sized nut and washer shall be tightened on each bolt to
the plate.
2308.7 Girders. Girders for single-story construction or gird-
ers supporting loads from a single floor shall not be less than 4
inches by 6 inches (102 mm by 152 mm) for spans 6 feet
(1829 mm) or less, provided that girders are spaced not more
than 8 feet (2438 mm) o.c. Spans for built-up 2-inch (51 mm)
g irders sha l l be in accordance w i th Tab le 2308 .9 .5 or
2308.9.6. Other girders shall be designed to support the loads
specified in this code. Girder end joints shall occur over sup-
ports.

Where a girder is spliced over a support, an adequate tie shall
be provided. The ends of beams or girders supported on
masonry or concrete shall not have less than 3 inches (76 mm)
of bearing.
2308.8 Floor joists. Spans for floor joists shall be in accor-
dance with Table 2308.8(1) or 2308.8(2). For other grades and
or species, refer to the AF&PA Span Tables for Joists and Raf-
ters.
2308.8.1 Bearing. Except where supported on a 1-inch by
4-inch (25.4 mm by 102 mm) ribbon strip and nailed to the
adjoining stud, the ends of each joist shall not have less than
11/2 inches (38 mm) of bearing on wood or metal, or less
than 3 inches (76 mm) on masonry.
2308.8.2 Framing details. Joists shall be supported later-
ally at the ends and at each support by solid blocking except
where the ends of the joists are nailed to a header, band or
rim joist or to an adjoining stud or by other means. Solid
blocking shall not be less than 2 inches (51mm) in thickness
and the full depth of the joist. Notches on the ends of joists
shall not exceed one-fourth the joist depth. Holes bored in
joists shall not be within 2 inches (51 mm) of the top or bot-
tom of the joist, and the diameter of any such hole shall not
exceed one-third the depth of the joist. Notches in the top or
bottom of joists shall not exceed one-sixth the depth and
shall not be located in the middle third of the span.
Joist framing from opposite sides of a beam, girder or
partition shall be lapped at least 3 inches (76 mm) or the
opposing joists shall be tied together in an approved manner.
Joists framing into the side of a wood girder shall be sup-
ported by framing anchors or on ledger strips not less than 2
inches by 2 inches (51 mm by 51 mm).
2308.8.2.1 Engineered wood products. Cuts, notches
and holes bored in trusses, structural composite lumber,
structural glue-laminated members or I-joists are not
permitted except where permitted by the manufacturer’s
recommendations or where the effects of such alterations
are specifically considered in the design of the member
by a registered design professional.

2308.8.3 Framing around openings. Trimmer and header
joists shall be doubled, or of lumber of equivalent cross sec-
tion, where the span of the header exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm).
The ends of header joists more than 6 feet (1829 mm) long
shall be supported by framing anchors or joist hangers
unless bearing on a beam, partition or wall. Tail joists over
12 feet (3658 mm) long shall be supported at the header by
framing anchors or on ledger strips not less than 2 inches by
2 inches (51 mm by 51 mm).
2308.8.4 Supporting bearing partitions. Bearing parti-
tions parallel to joists shall be supported on beams, girders,
doubled joists, walls or other bearing partitions. Bearing
partitions perpendicular to joists shall not be offset from
supporting girders, walls or partitions more than the joist
depth unless such joists are of sufficient size to carry the
additional load.

478

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:34 AM

28

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

479

WOOD

N
O
M
M
O
C
s
E
R
a
L
O
B
e
F
A
A
T
S
g
N
n
A
P
p
S
e
e
T
S
S

8
8
0
3
2

.

(

1

)

a
J
n
e
d
s
L
e
F

R
O
O

O

I
l

S
0
E
6
3
C
=
E
D
P
S
L
R
s
E
p
B
0
3
=
L
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

U

M

I

(

R

i

i
t

l

i

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

J

G
N
s
T
S
e
C
h
O
c
A
n
P
S

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
1
=

f

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
2
=

f

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

l
f

o
o

r

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

7

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

0

2
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

9

0
2

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

0
1

4
2

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

0
1

4
2

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

7

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

2

8
1

-

6

1
2

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

6

8
1

-

6

2
2

-

6

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

0
1

4
2

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

8
1

-

7

1
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

8

9

-

4

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

0

6
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

7

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

0

3
2

-

0

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

9

0
2

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

0

3
2

-

0

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

9

0
2

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

1
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

3
2

-

3

1
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

3
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

4

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

1

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

8

-

5

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

1

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

9

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

0

8
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

0

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

8

9

-

0
1

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

2

7
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

5

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

1

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

5

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

9

-

0

1
1

-

6

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

2

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

5

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

1

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

29

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:35 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

480

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

8
s
8
a
0
e
3
F
2
A
S
E
N
g
L
n
A
B
P
p
A
S
e
T
e
T
S
S

.

(

1

)

—

n
o
c

i
t

S
0
E
6
3
C
=
E
D
P
S
L
R
s
E
p
B
d
0
3
e
u
=
n
L
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

a
J
n
e
d
s
L
e
F

R
O
O

O

I
l

N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

R

i

i
t

l

i

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

J

G
N
s
T
S
e
C
h
O
c
A
n
P
S

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
1
=

f

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
2
=

f

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

l
f

o
o

r

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

8

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

0
1

0
1

-

8

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

1

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

8

0
1

-

1

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

0
1

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

0

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

5

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

6

7
1

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

4

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

1
2

-

1

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

0
1

-

1

3
1

-

4

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

3

9

-

6

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

9

7

-

4

9

-

5

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0
1

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

2

9

-

0
1

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

7

9
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

8

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

8

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

8

0
2

-

3

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

2

8
1

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

7

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

2

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

2

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

1

5
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

9

1
1

-

4

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

8

-

0

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1
1

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

7

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

1

9
1

-

6

9

-

7

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

2

8

-

6

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

1

5
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

4

9

-

5

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

2

6

-

7

8

-

5

9

-

1
1

1
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

2

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

5

8
1

-

9

9

-

2

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

8
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

30

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:36 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

481

WOOD

N
O
M
M
O
C
E
R
L
s
O
B
a
F
e
A
T
S
A
N
g
A
n
P
S
v
T
L
S

8
8
0
3
2

.

(

2

)

J
n
e
d
s
e
L
F

R
O
O
R

O

I
i
t

S
E
0
6
C
3
E
=
P
D
S
L
R
E
B
s
p
0
4
L
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

U

M

I

(

i

a

l

i

i

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

J

G
N
s
T
S
e
C
h
O
c
A
n
P
S

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
1
=

f

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
2
=

f

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

l
f

o
o

r

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

1
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

3
2

-

3

1
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

3
2

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

0

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

9

0
2

-

7

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

8
1

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

0

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

4

0
1

-

0

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

0

8
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

5

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

9

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

6
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

9

-

4

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

0

6
1

-

8

8

-

6

0
1

-

0
1

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

1
2

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

7

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

8
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

7

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

8
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

1
2

-

1

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

1
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

9

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1
1

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

8
1

-

7

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

1

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

2

7
1

-

7

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

4

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

9

0
2

-

4

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

0
1

9

-

6

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

6

7

-

4

9

-

5

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

6

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

4

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

4

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

7
1

-

0
1

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

6

9

-

6

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

31

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:37 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

482

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

8
8
s
0
a
3
F
e
2
S
A
E
N
L
g
A
B
n
P
A
S
v
T
T
L
S

.

(

2

)

—

n
o
c

i
t

S
E
0
6
C
3
E
=
P
D
S
L
R
E
s
B
p
d
e
0
u
4
n
L
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

J
n
e
d
s
e
L
F

R
O
O
R

O

I
i
t

N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

i

a

l

i

i

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

J

G
N
s
T
S
e
C
h
O
c
A
n
P
S

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
1
=

f

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

s
p
0
2
=

f

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

6
x
2

8
x
2

0
1
x
2

2
1
x
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

l
f

o
o

r

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

8

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

0
1

9

-

8

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

7
1

-

5

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

8

1
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

2

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

5

8
1

-

9

9

-

2

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

5

8
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

0

1
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

8

-

8

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

7

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

8

-

2

0
1

-

4

2
1

-

8

4
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

8

1
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

6

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

2

9

-

4

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

2

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

2

8

-

8

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

4

9

-

5

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

2

6

-

9

8

-

7

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

4

9

-

0

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

9

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

9

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

3

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

7

2
1

-

4

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

8

1
1

-

3

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

0

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

2

8
1

-

5

9

-

0

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

5

5
1

-

7

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

7

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

6

3
1

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

8

0
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

6

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

5

8

-

6

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

4

6
1

-

0
1

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

4

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

1

5
1

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

9

1
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

4

7

-

4

9

-

3

1
1

-

4

3
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

8

0
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

8

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

5

8

-

8

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

6

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

1

5
1

-

5

7

-

9

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

7

8

-

5

9

-

1
1

1
1

-

0
1

6

-

0

7

-

8

9

-

1

0
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

4

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

0

7
1

-

0

8

-

4

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

7

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

6

3
1

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

7

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

6

3
1

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

2

7

-

9

9

-

6

1
1

-

0

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

8

0
1

-

1

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

8
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

E

a
e
b
d
n

i
r

g
n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

a
h

l
l

e
b

i

c
n

r

d
e
s
a
e

t

2
o

i

s
e
h
c
n

.

32

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:37 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2308.8.5 Lateral support. Floor, attic and roof framing
with a nominal depth-to-thickness ratio greater than or
equal to 5:1 shall have one edge held in line for the entire
span. Where the nominal depth-to-thickness ratio of the
framing member exceeds 6:1, there shall be one line of
bridging for each 8 feet (2438 mm) of span, unless both
edges of the member are held in line. The bridging shall
consist of not less than 1-inch by 3-inch (25 mm by 76 mm)
lumber, double nailed at each end, of equivalent metal
bracing of equal rigidity, full-depth solid blocking or other
approved means. A line of bridging shall also be required
at supports where equivalent lateral support is not other-
wise provided.
2308.8.6 Structural floor sheathing. Structural floor
sheathing shall comply with the provisions of Section
2304.7.1.
2308.8.7 Under-floor ventilation. For under-floor ventila-
tion, see Section 1203.3.
2308.9 Wall framing.
2308.9.1 Size, height and spacing. The size, height and
spacing of studs shall be in accordance with Table 2308.9.1
except that utility-grade studs shall not be spaced more than
16 inches (406 mm) o.c., or support more than a roof and
ceiling, or exceed 8 feet (2438 mm) in height for exterior
walls and load-bearing walls or 10 feet (3048 mm) for inte-
rior nonload-bearing walls. Studs shall be continuous from
a support at the sole plate to a support at the top plate to resist
loads perpendicular to the wall. The support shall be a foun-
dation or floor, ceiling or roof diaphragm or shall be
designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
Exception: Jack studs, trimmer studs and cripple studs
at openings in walls that comply with Table 2308.9.5.
2308.9.2 Framing details. Studs shall be placed with their
wide dimension perpendicular to the wall. Not less than three
studs shall be installed at each corner of an exterior wall.
Exception: At corners, two studs are permitted, provided
wood spacers or backup cleats of 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm)

WOOD

wood structural panel, 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) Type M “Exterior
Glue” particleboard, 1-inch-thick (25 mm) lumber or
other approved devices that will serve as an adequate
backing for the attachment of facing materials are used.
Where fire-resistance ratings or shear values are involved,
wood spacers, backup cleats or other devices shall not be
used unless specifically approved for such use.
2308.9.2.1 Top plates. Bearing and exterior wall studs
shall be capped with double top plates installed to pro-
vide overlapping at corners and at intersections with
other partitions. End joints in double top plates shall be
offset at least 48 inches (1219 mm), and shall be nailed
with not less than eight 16d face nails on each side of the
joint. Plates shall be a nominal 2 inches (51 mm) in depth
and have a width at least equal to the width of the studs.
Exception: A single top plate is permitted, provided
the plate is adequately tied at joints, corners and inter-
secting walls by at least the equivalent of 3-inch by
6-inch (76 mm by 152 mm) by 0.036-inch-thick
(0.914 mm) galvanized steel that is nailed to each wall
or segment of wall by six 8d nails or equivalent, pro-
vided the rafters, joists or trusses are centered over the
studs with a tolerance of no more than 1 inch (25 mm).
2308.9.2.2 Top plates for studs spaced at 24 inches
(610 mm). Where bearing studs are spaced at 24-inch
(610 mm) intervals and top plates are less than two
2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) or two 3-inch by
4-inch (76 mm by 102 mm) members and where the floor
joists, floor trusses or roof trusses that they support are
spaced at more than 16-inch (406 mm) intervals, such
joists or trusses shall bear within 5 inches (127 mm) of
the studs beneath or a third plate shall be installed.
2308 .9 .2 .3 Nonbear ing wa l ls and par t it ions . In
nonbearing walls and partitions, studs shall be spaced not
more than 28 inches (711 mm) o.c. and are permitted to
be set with the long dimension parallel to the wall. Inte-
rior nonbearing partitions shall be capped with no less
than a single top plate installed to provide overlapping at

TABLE 2308.9.1
SIZE, HEIGHT AND SPACING OF WOOD STUDS

BEARING WALLS

NONBEARING WALLS

Laterally unsupported
stud heighta
(feet)

Supporting roof
and ceiling only

Supporting one
floor, roof
and ceiling

Supporting two floors,
roof
and ceiling

STUD SIZE
(inches)

2 ´ 3b
2 ´ 4
3 ´ 4
2 ´ 5
2 ´ 6

—
10
10
10
10

Spacing
(inches)

—
16
24
24
24

—
24
24
24
24

—
—
16
—
16

Laterally unsupported
stud heighta
(feet)

Spacing
(inches)

10
14
14
16
20

16
24
24
24
24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Listed heights are distances between points of lateral support placed perpendicular to the plane of the wall. Increases in unsupported height are permitted where
justified by an analysis.
b. Shall not be used in exterior walls.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

483

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:38 AM

33

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

corners and at intersections with other walls and parti-
tions. The plate shall be continuously tied at joints by
solid blocking at least 16 inches (406 mm) in length and
equal in size to the plate or by 1/2-inch by 11/2-inch (12.7
mm by 38 mm) metal ties with spliced sections fastened
with two 16d nails on each side of the joint.
2308.9.2.4 Plates or sills. Studs shall have full bearing
on a plate or sill not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in thick-
ness having a width not less than that of the wall studs.
2308.9.3 Bracing. Braced wall lines shall consist of braced
wall panels that meet the requirements for location, type and
amount of bracing as shown in Figure 2308.9.3, specified in
Table 2308.9.3(1) and are in line or offset from each other
by not more than 4 feet (1219 mm). Braced wall panels shall
start not more than 121/2 feet (3810 mm) from each end of a
braced wall line. Braced wall panels shall be clearly indi-
cated on the plans. Construction of braced wall panels shall
be by one of the following methods:
1. Nominal 1-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) con-
tinuous diagonal braces let into top and bottom plates
and intervening studs, placed at an angle not more
than 60 degrees (1.0 rad) or less than 45 degrees (0.79
rad) from the horizontal and attached to the framing in
conformance with Table 2304.9.1.
2. Wood boards of 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) net minimum
thickness applied diagonally on studs spaced not over
24 inches (610 mm) o.c.
3. Wood structural panel sheathing with a thickness not
less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) for 16-inch (406 mm) or
24-inch (610 mm) stud spacing in accordance with
Tables 2308.9.3(2) and 2308.9.3(3).
4. Fiberboard sheathing panels not less than 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) thick applied vertically or horizontally on
studs spaced not over 16 inches (406 mm) o.c. where
installed with fasteners in accordance with Section
2306.6 and Table 2306.6.
5. Gypsum board [sheathing 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm)
by 4-feet-wide (1219 mm) wallboard or veneer base]
on studs spaced not over 24 inches (610 mm) o.c. and
nailed at 7 inches (178 mm) o.c. with nails as required
by Table 2306.7.
6. Particleboard wall sheathing panels where installed in
accordance with Table 2308.9.3(4).
7. Portland cement plaster on studs spaced 16 inches
(406 mm) o.c. installed in accordance with Section
2510.
8. Hardboard panel siding where installed in accordance
with Section 2303.1.6 and Table 2308.9.3(5).
For cripple wall bracing, see Section 2308.9.4.1. For
Methods 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, each panel must be at least 48
inches (1219 mm) in length, covering three stud spaces
where studs are spaced 16 inches (406 mm) apart and cover-
ing two stud spaces where studs are spaced 24 inches (610
mm) apart.

For Method 5, each panel must be at least 96 inches (2438
mm) in length where applied to one face of a panel and 48
inches (1219 mm) where applied to both faces. All vertical
joints of panel sheathing shall occur over studs and adjacent
panel joints shall be nailed to common framing members.
Horizontal joints shall occur over blocking or other framing
equal in size to the studding except where waived by the
installation requirements for the specific sheathing materi-
als. Sole plates shall be nailed to the floor framing and top
plates shall be connected to the framing above in accordance
with Section 2308.3.2. Where joists are perpendicular to
braced wall lines above, blocking shall be provided under
and in line with the braced wall panels.

2308.9.3.1 Alternative bracing. Any bracing required
by Section 2308.9.3 is permitted to be replaced by the
following:

1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a
length of not less than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and
a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each
p a n e l s h a l l b e s h e a t h e d o n o n e f a c e w i t h
3/8-inch-minimum-thickness (9.5 mm) wood struc-
tural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or gal-
vanized box nails in accordance with Table
2304.9.1 and blocked at wood structural panel
edges. Two anchor bolts installed in accordance
with Section 2308.6 shall be provided in each panel.
Anchor bolts shall be placed at each panel outside
quarter points. Each panel end stud shall have a
tie-down device fastened to the foundation, capable
of providing an approved uplift capacity of not less
than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The tie-down device
shall be installed in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s recommendations. The panels shall be sup-
ported directly on a foundation or on floor framing
supported directly on a foundation that is continu-
ous across the entire length of the braced wall line.
This foundation shall be reinforced with not less
than one No. 4 bar top and bottom.
Where the continuous foundation is required to
have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a
minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305
mm) continuous footing or turned down slab edge
is permitted at door openings in the braced wall
line. This continuous footing or turned down slab
edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No.
4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be
lapped 15 inches (381 mm) with the reinforcement
required in the continuous foundation located
directly under the braced wall line.
2. In the first story of two-story buildings, each wall
panel shall be braced in accordance with Section
2308.9.3.1, Item 1, except that the wood structural
panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces,
three anchor bolts shall be placed at one-quarter
points, and tie-down device uplift capacity shall
not be less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).

484

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:38 AM

34

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY

MAXIMUM WALL SPACING (feet)

REQUIRED BRACING LENGTH, b

A, B and C
D and E

35¢-0²
25¢-0²

Table 2308.9.3(1) and Section 2308.9.3
Table 2308.12.4

WOOD

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.9.3
BASIC COMPONENTS OF THE LATERAL BRACING SYSTEM

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

485

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:41 AM

35

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2308.9.3(1)
BRACED WALL PANELSa

CONSTRUCTION METHODSb, c

1

X

X

¾

—

2

X

X

X

X

3

X

X

X

X

4

X

X

X

X

5

X

X

Xe

X

6

X

X

X

X

7

X

X

X

X

8

X

X

X

X

SEISMIC DESIGN
CATEGORY

CONDITION

One story, top of two or
three story

First story of two story or
second story of three story

First story of three story

One story or top of two
story

A and B

C

First story of two story

—

X

X

X

Xe

X

X

X

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. This table specifies minimum requirements for braced panels that form interior or exterior braced wall lines.
b. See Section 2308.9.3 for full description.
c. See Sections 2308.9.3.1 and 2308.9.3.2 for alternative braced panel requirements.
d. Building length is the dimension parallel to the braced wall length.
e. Gypsum wallboard applied to framing supports that are spaced at 16 inches on center.
f. The required lengths shall be doubled for gypsum board applied to only one face of a braced wall panel.

BRACED PANEL LOCATION
AND LENGTHd

Located in accordance with
Section 2308.9.3 and not
more than 25 feet on center.

Located in accordance with
Section 2308.9.3 and not
more than 25 feet on center.

Located in accordance with
Section 2308.9.3 and not
more than 25 feet on center,
but total length shall not be
less than 25% of building
lengthf.

TABLE 2308.9.3(2)
EXPOSED PLYWOOD PANEL SIDING

MINIMUM THICKNESSa
(inch)

MINIMUM NUMBER OF PLIES

3/8
1/2

3

4

STUD SPACING
(inches)
Plywood siding applied directly
to studs or over sheathing

16b

24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Thickness of grooved panels is measured at bottom of grooves.
b. Spans are permitted to be 24 inches if plywood siding applied with face grain perpendicular to studs or over one of the following: (1) 1-inch board sheathing, (2) 7/16
-inch wood structural panel sheathing or (3) 3/8-inch wood structural panel sheathing with strength axis (which is the long direction of the panel unless otherwise
marked) of sheathing perpendicular to studs.

TABLE 2308.9.3(3)
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL WALL SHEATHINGb
(Not Exposed to the Weather, Strength Axis Parallel or Perpendicular to Studs Except as Indicated Below)

MINIMUM THICKNESS
(inch)

➡

PANEL SPAN RATING

Siding nailed to studs

Sheathing parallel to studs

Sheathing perpendicular to studs

STUD SPACING (inches)

Nailable sheathing

3/8, 15/32, 1/2

7/16, 15/32, 1/2

16/0, 20/0, 24/0, 32/16
Wall–24² o.c.

24/0, 24/16, 32/16
Wall–24² o.c.

24

24

16

24a

24

24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Plywood shall consist of four or more plies.
b. Blocking of horizontal joints shall not be required except as specified in Sections 2306.3 and 2308.12.4.

486

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009pg486.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 11:57:41 AM

36

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

TABLE 2308.9.3(4)
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR PARTICLEBOARD WALL SHEATHING
(Not Exposed to the Weather, Long Dimension of the Panel Parallel or Perpendicular to Studs)

STUD SPACING (inches)

GRADE

THICKNESS
(inch)

Siding nailed
to studs

Sheathing under coverings specified in
Section 2308.9.3 parallel or perpendicular to studs

M-S “Exterior Glue”
and M-2“Exterior Glue”

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

3/8
1/2

16

16

TABLE 2308.9.3(5)
HARDBOARD SIDING

MINIMUM NOMINAL
THICKNESS
(inch)

2 × 4 FRAMING
MAXIMUM SPACING

NAIL

SIZEa, b, d

—

16

NAIL SPACING

General

16² o.c.

16² o.c.

Bracing panelsc

Not applicable

Not applicable

SIDING

1. Lap siding

Direct to studs

Over sheathing

2. Square edge panel siding

Direct to studs

Over sheathing

3. Shiplap edge panel siding

Direct to studs

Over sheathing

3/8
3/8

3/8

3/8

3/8

3/8

16² o.c.

16² o.c.

24² o.c.

24² o.c.

16² o.c.

16² o.c.

8d

10d

6d

8d

6d

8d

6² o.c. edges;
12² o.c. at intermediate supports

4² o.c. edges;
8² o.c. at intermediate supports

6² o.c. edges;
12² o.c. at intermediate supports

4² o.c. edges;
8² o.c. at intermediate supports

6² o.c. edges;
12² o.c. at intermediate supports

4² o.c. edges;
8² o.c. at intermediate supports

6² o.c. edges;
12² o.c. at intermediate supports

4² o.c. edges;
8² o.c. at intermediate supports

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Nails shall be corrosion resistant.
b. Minimum acceptable nail dimensions:

Panel Siding
(inch)

Lap Siding
(inch)

Shank diameter
Head diameter

0.092
0.225

0.099
0.240

c. Where used to comply with Section 2308.9.3.
d. Nail length must accommodate the sheathing and penetrate framing 11/2 inches.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

487

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:42 AM

37

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

2308.9.3.2 Alternate bracing wall panel adjacent to a
door or window opening. Any bracing required by Sec-
tion 2308.9.3 is permitted to be replaced by the following
when used adjacent to a door or window opening with a
full-length header:
1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a
length of not less than 16 inches (406 mm) and a
height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with a single
layer of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) minimum thickness
wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d
common or galvanized box nails in accordance
with Figure 2308.9.3.2. The wood structural panel
sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or
glued-laminated header and shall be nailed in
accordance with Figure 2308.9.3.2. A built-up
header consisting of at least two 2 × 12s and fas-
tened in acco rdance w i th I tem 24 o f Tab le
2304.9.1 shall be permitted to be used. A spacer, if
used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up
beam opposite the wood structural panel sheath-
ing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each
panel. The clear span of the header between the
inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6
feet (1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486
mm) in length. A strap with an uplift capacity of
not less than 1,000 pounds (4,400 N) shall fasten

the header to the inner studs opposite the sheath-
ing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch (15.9
mm) diameter and installed in accordance with
Section 2308.6 shall be provided in the center of
each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel
shall have a tie-down device fastened to the foun-
dation with an uplift capacity of not less than 4,200
pounds (18 480 N).
Where a panel is located on one side of the open-
ing, the header shall extend between the inside face
of the first full-length stud of the panel and the bear-
ing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap
with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds
(4400 N) shall fasten the header to the bearing
studs. The bearing studs shall also have a tie-down
device fastened to the foundation with an uplift
capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N).
The tie-down devices shall be an embedded
strap type, installed in accordance with the manu-
facturer’s recommendations. The panels shall be
supported directly on a foundation that is continu-
ous across the entire length of the braced wall line.
This foundation shall be reinforced with not less
than one No. 4 bar top and bottom.
Where the continuous foundation is required to
have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a
minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound = 4.448 N.

FIGURE 2308.9.3.2
ALTERNATE BRACED WALL PANEL ADJACENT TO A DOOR OR WINDOW OPENING

488

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009pg488.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 1:56:27 PM

38

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

mm) continuous footing or turned down slab edge
is permitted at door openings in the braced wall
line. This continuous footing or turned down slab
edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No.
4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be
lapped not less than 15 inches (381 mm) with the
reinforcement required in the continuous founda-
tion located directly under the braced wall line.
2. In the first story of two-story buildings, each wall
panel shall be braced in accordance with Item 1
above, except that each panel shall have a length of
not less than 24 inches (610 mm).
2308.9.4 Cripple walls. Foundation cripple walls shall be
framed of studs not less in size than the studding above with
a minimum length of 14 inches (356 mm), or shall be framed
of solid blocking. Where exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) in
height, such walls shall be framed of studs having the size
required for an additional story.

2308.9.4.1 Bracing. For the purposes of this section,
cripple walls having a stud height exceeding 14 inches
(356 mm) shall be considered a story and shall be braced
in accordance with Table 2308.9.3(1) for Seismic Design
Category A, B or C. See Section 2308.12.4 for Seismic
Design Category D or E.

2308.9.4.2 Nailing of bracing. Spacing of edge nailing
for required wall bracing shall not exceed 6 inches (152
mm) o.c. along the foundation plate and the top plate of
the cripple wall. Nail size, nail spacing for field nailing
and more restrictive boundary nailing requirements shall
be as required elsewhere in the code for the specific brac-
ing material used.

2308.9.5 Openings in exterior walls.

2308.9.5.1 Headers. Headers shall be provided over
each opening in exterior-bearing walls. The spans in
Table 2308.9.5 are permitted to be used for one- and
two-family dwellings. Headers for other buildings shall
be designed in accordance with Section 2301.2, Item 1 or
2. Headers shall be of two pieces of nominal 2-inch (51
mm) framing lumber set on edge as permitted by Table
2308.9.5 and nailed together in accordance with Table
2304.9.1 or of solid lumber of equivalent size.

2308.9.5.2 Header support. Wall studs shall support the
ends of the header in accordance with Table 2308.9.5.
Each end of a lintel or header shall have a length of bear-
ing of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) for the full width
of the lintel.

2308.9.6 Openings in interior bearing partitions. Head-
ers shall be provided over each opening in interior bearing
partitions as required in Section 2308.9.5. The spans in
Table 2308.9.6 are permitted to be used. Wall studs shall
support the ends of the header in accordance with Table
2308.9.5 or 2308.9.6, as appropriate.

2308.9.7 Openings in interior nonbearing partitions.
Openings in nonbearing partitions are permitted to be
framed with single studs and headers. Each end of a lintel or

WOOD

header shall have a length of bearing of not less than 11/2
inches (38 mm) for the full width of the lintel.
2308.9.8 Pipes in walls. Stud partitions containing
plumbing, heating or other pipes shall be so framed and
the joists underneath so spaced as to give proper clear-
ance for the piping. Where a partition containing such
piping runs parallel to the floor joists, the joists under-
neath such partitions shall be doubled and spaced to per-
mit the passage of such pipes and shall be bridged. Where
plumbing, heating or other pipes are placed in or partly in
a partition, necessitating the cutting of the soles or plates,
a metal tie not less than 0.058 inch (1.47 mm) (16 galva-
nized gage) and 11/2 inches (38 mm) wide shall be fas-
tened to each plate across and to each side of the opening
with not less than six 16d nails.
2308.9.9 Bridging. Unless covered by interior or exterior
wall coverings or sheathing meeting the minimum require-
ments of this code, stud partitions or walls with studs hav-
ing a height-to-least-thickness ratio exceeding 50 shall
have bridging not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness
and of the same width as the studs fitted snugly and nailed
thereto to provide adequate lateral support. Bridging shall
be placed in every stud cavity and at a frequency such that
no stud so braced shall have a height-to-least-thickness
ratio exceeding 50 with the height of the stud measured
between horizontal framing and bridging or between
bridging, whichever is greater.
2308.9.10 Cutting and notching. In exterior walls and
bearing partitions, any wood stud is permitted to be cut or
notched to a depth not exceeding 25 percent of its width.
Cutting or notching of studs to a depth not greater than 40
percent of the width of the stud is permitted in nonbearing
partitions supporting no loads other than the weight of the
partition.
2308.9.11 Bored holes. A hole not greater in diameter
than 40 percent of the stud width is permitted to be bored
in any wood stud. Bored holes not greater than 60 percent
of the width of the stud are permitted in nonbearing parti-
tions or in any wall where each bored stud is doubled, pro-
vided not more than two such successive doubled studs
are so bored.
In no case shall the edge of the bored hole be nearer than
5/8 inch (15.9 mm) to the edge of the stud.
Bored holes shall not be located at the same section of
stud as a cut or notch.
2308.10 Roof and ceiling framing. The framing details
required in this section apply to roofs having a minimum
slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent
slope) or greater. Where the roof slope is less than three units
vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope), members
supporting rafters and ceiling joists such as ridge board, hips
and valleys shall be designed as beams.
2308.10.1 Wind uplift. The roof construction shall have
rafter and truss ties to the wall below. Resultant uplift
loads shall be transferred to the foundation using a con-
tinuous load path. The rafter or truss to wall connection
shall comply with Tables 2304.9.1 and 2308.10.1.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

489

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:54 AM

39

490

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

G
N
R
A
e
E
n
B
P
R
O
R
E
p
T
S
5
X
9
d
E
n
8
a
0
R
3
O
e
n
2
F
E
P
L
S
n
B
N
e
A
A
T
h
P
S
u
o
R
S
E
D
R
G
D
H
N
A
R
E
a
L
D
A
E
F
H
s
a
g
u
o

.

.

-
I

a

I

i
I

W

R
A

u
S
q
L
e
L

(

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

s
n
a
p
S

f

o

r

D

l

i

-
r

r

h
c

,

e

m

F

i

r

,

t

r

i

r

e
c
u

-

i

-

F

b
r

d
n
a

i

r

d
e

N

u

m

e
b

r

o

f

k
c
a
J

s
d
u
S

t

)

G
S
N
R
T
E
R
D
O
A
P
E
P
H
U
S

I

E
Z
S

I

O
N
S
D
N
U
O
R
G

W

L

D
A
O

(

s
p

e
)
f

0
3

0
5

B

u

l
i

g
n
d

i

w

i

d

t

h

c

f
(

e
e

)
t

0
2

8
2

6
3

0
2

8
2

6
3

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

R

o
o

f

&

C

e

i
l
i

g
n

2

-

4
´
2

3

-

6

1

3

-

2

1

2

-

0
1

1

3

-

2

1

2

-

9

1

2

-

6

1

2

-

6
´
2

5

-

5

1

4

-

8

1

4

-

2

1

4

-

8

1

4

-

1

1

3

-

8

2

2

-

8
´
2

6

-

0
1

1

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

4

2

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

2

2

4

-

7

2

2

-

0
1
´
2

8

-

5

2

7

-

3

2

6

-

6

2

7

-

3

2

6

-

3

2

5

-

7

2

2

-

2
1
´
2

9

-

9

2

8

-

5

2

7

-

6

2

8

-

5

2

7

-

3

2

6

-

6

2

3

-

8
´
2

8

-

4

1

7

-

5

1

6

-

8

1

7

-

5

1

6

-

5

2

5

-

9

2

3

-

0
1
´
2

0
1

-

6

1

9

-

1

2

8

-

2

2

9

-

1

2

7

-

0
1

2

7

-

0

2

3

-

2
1
´
2

2
1

-

2

2

0
1

-

7

2

9

-

5

2

0
1

-

7

2

9

-

2

2

8

-

2

2

4

-

8
´
2

9

-

2

1

8

-

4

1

7

-

8

1

8

-

4

1

7

-

5

1

6

-

8

1

4

-

0
1
´
2

1
1

-

8

1

0
1

-

6

1

9

-

5

2

0
1

-

6

1

9

-

1

2

8

-

2

2

4

-

2
1
´
2

4
1

-

1

1

2
1

-

2

2

0
1

-

1
1

2

2
1

-

2

2

0
1

-

7

2

9

-

5

2

R
C

e
o
n
o
e

,
f
t

B
C

o
o
1
F
g
g
n
n
a
e
e

i
r
i
l
i

&

-
r

l

r

2

-

4
´
2

3

-

1

1

2

-

9

1

2

-

5

1

2

-

9

1

2

-

5

1

2

-

2

1

2

-

6
´
2

4

-

6

1

4

-

0

1

3

-

7

2

4

-

1

1

3

-

7

2

3

-

3

2

2

-

8
´
2

5

-

9

2

5

-

0

2

4

-

6

2

5

-

2

2

4

-

6

2

4

-

1

2

2

-

0
1
´
2

7

-

0

2

6

-

2

2

5

-

6

2

6

-

4

2

5

-

6

2

5

-

0

2

2

-

2
1
´
2

8

-

1

2

7

-

1

2

6

-

5

2

7

-

4

2

6

-

5

2

5

-

9

3

3

-

8
´
2

7

-

2

1

6

-

3

2

5

-

8

2

6

-

5

2

5

-

8

2

5

-

1

2

3

-

0
1
´
2

8

-

9

2

7

-

8

2

6

-

1
1

2

7

-

1
1

2

6

-

1
1

2

6

-

3

2

3

-

2
1
´
2

0
1

-

2

2

8

-

1
1

2

8

-

0

2

9

-

2

2

8

-

0

2

7

-

3

2

4

-

8
´
2

8

-

1

1

7

-

3

1

6

-

7

1

7

-

5

1

6

-

6

1

5

-

1
1

2

4

-

0
1
´
2

0
1

-

1

1

8

-

0
1

2

8

-

0

2

9

-

1

2

8

-

0

2

7

-

2

2

4

-

2
1
´
2

1
1

-

9

2

0
1

-

3

2

9

-

3

2

0
1

-

7

2

9

-

3

2

8

-

4

2

R

o
e
o
F
n
o
a
o
p
S

f

,

C

i
r
l
i

g
n

&

1

C

l

a
e

r

l

2

-

4
´
2

2

-

8

1

2

-

4

1

2

-

1

1

2

-

7

1

2

-

3

1

2

-

0

1

2

-

6
´
2

3

-

1
1

1

3

-

5

2

3

-

0

2

3

-

0
1

2

3

-

4

2

3

-

0

2

2

-

8
´
2

5

-

0

2

4

-

4

2

3

-

0
1

2

4

-

0
1

2

4

-

2

2

3

-

9

2

2

-

0
1
´
2

6

-

1

2

5

-

3

2

4

-

8

2

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

1

2

4

-

7

3

2

-

2
1
´
2

7

-

1

2

6

-

1

3

5

-

5

3

6

-

0
1

2

5

-

1
1

3

5

-

4

3

3

-

8
´
2

6

-

3

2

5

-

5

2

4

-

0
1

2

6

-

1

2

5

-

3

2

4

-

8

2

3

-

0
1
´
2

7

-

7

2

6

-

7

2

5

-

1
1

2

7

-

5

2

6

-

5

2

5

-

9

2

3

-

2
1
´
2

8

-

0
1

2

7

-

8

2

6

-

0
1

2

8

-

7

2

7

-

5

2

6

-

8

2

4

-

8
´
2

7

-

2

1

6

-

3

2

5

-

7

2

7

-

0

1

6

-

1

2

5

-

5

2

4

-

0
1
´
2

8

-

9

2

7

-

7

2

6

-

0
1

2

8

-

7

2

7

-

5

2

6

-

7

2

4

-

2
1
´
2

0
1

-

2

2

8

-

0
1

2

7

-

1
1

2

9

-

1
1

2

8

-

7

2

7

-

8

2

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

40

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:55 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

491

WOOD

e
5
n
9
F
P
8
S
n
0
3
N
e
2
A
h
P
E
S
u
L
o
B
R
S
A
E
T
D
R
G
D
H
N
A
R
a
E
L
D
A
E
F
H
s
a
g
u
o

.

.

—

G
N
R
A
e
n
E
B
P
R
d
O
e
u
R
n
E
p
T
S
n
X
d
o
E
n
c
a
R
O

i
t

-
I

a

I

i
I

W

R
A

u
S
q
L
e
L

(

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

s
n
a
p
S

f

o

r

D

l

i

-
r

r

h
c

,

e

m

F

i

r

,

t

r

i

r

e
c
u

-

i

-

F

b
r

d
n
a

i

r

d
e

N

u

m

e
b

r

o

f

k
c
a
J

S

t

s
d
u

)

G
S
N
R
T
E
R
D
O
A
P
E
P
H
U
S

I

E
Z
S

I

O
N
S
D
N
U
O
R
G

W

L

D
A
O

(

s
p

e
)
f

0
3

0
5

B

u

l
i

g
n
d

i

w

i

d

t

h

f
(
c

e
e

)
t

0
2

8
2

6
3

0
2

8
2

6
3

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

n
a
p
S

N

J

d

R
C

-
r
s
e
,
r
f
t
o
o
n
o
o
e
F

B
C

g
n
g
n
a
e
e

i
r
i
l
i

&

2

l

2

-

4
´
2

2

-

7

1

2

-

3

1

2

-

0

1

2

-

6

1

2

-

2

1

1

-

1
1

1

2

-

6
´
2

3

-

9

2

3

-

3

2

2

-

1
1

2

3

-

8

2

3

-

2

2

2

-

0
1

2

2

-

8
´
2

4

-

9

2

4

-

2

2

3

-

9

2

4

-

7

2

4

-

0

2

3

-

8

2

2

-

0
1
´
2

5

-

9

2

5

-

1

2

4

-

7

3

5

-

8

2

4

-

1
1

2

4

-

5

3

2

-

2
1
´
2

6

-

8

2

5

-

0
1

3

5

-

3

3

6

-

6

2

5

-

9

3

5

-

2

3

3

-

8
´
2

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

2

2

4

-

8

2

5

-

9

2

5

-

1

2

4

-

7

2

3

-

0
1
´
2

7

-

3

2

6

-

4

2

5

-

8

2

7

-

1

2

6

-

2

2

5

-

7

2

3

-

2
1
´
2

8

-

5

2

7

-

4

2

6

-

7

2

8

-

2

2

7

-

2

2

6

-

5

3

4

-

8
´
2

6

-

0
1

1

6

-

0

2

5

-

5

2

6

-

8

1

5

-

0
1

2

5

-

3

2

4

-

0
1
´
2

8

-

4

2

7

-

4

2

6

-

7

2

8

-

2

2

7

-

2

2

6

-

5

2

4

-

2
1
´
2

9

-

8

2

8

-

6

2

7

-

8

2

9

-

5

2

8

-

3

2

7

-

5

2

R
C

a
o
e
o

r
f

,

C

2
o
o
g
F
n
n
a
e
p
S

i
l
i

&

l

l

s
r

2

-

4
´
2

2

-

1

1

1

-

8

1

1

-

6

2

2

-

0

1

1

-

8

1

1

-

5

2

2

-

6
´
2

3

-

1

2

2

-

8

2

2

-

4

2

3

-

0

2

2

-

7

2

2

-

3

2

2

-

8
´
2

3

-

0
1

2

3

-

4

2

3

-

0

3

3

-

0
1

2

3

-

4

2

2

-

1
1

3

2

-

0
1
´
2

4

-

9

2

4

-

1

3

3

-

8

3

4

-

8

2

4

-

0

3

3

-

7

3

2

-

2
1
´
2

5

-

6

3

4

-

9

3

4

-

3

3

5

-

5

3

4

-

8

3

4

-

2

3

3

-

8
´
2

4

-

0
1

2

4

-

2

2

3

-

9

2

4

-

9

2

4

-

1

2

3

-

8

2

3

-

0
1
´
2

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

1

2

4

-

7

3

5

-

0
1

2

5

-

0

2

4

-

6

3

3

-

2
1
´
2

6

-

0
1

2

5

-

1
1

3

5

-

4

3

6

-

9

2

5

-

0
1

3

5

-

3

3

4

-

8
´
2

5

-

7

2

4

-

0
1

2

4

-

4

2

5

-

6

2

4

-

9

2

4

-

3

2

4

-

0
1
´
2

6

-

0
1

2

5

-

1
1

2

5

-

3

2

6

-

9

2

5

-

0
1

2

5

-

2

2

4

-

2
1
´
2

7

-

1
1

2

6

-

0
1

2

6

-

2

3

7

-

9

2

6

-

9

2

6

-

0

3

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

h
c
n

=

4
5
2

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

=

8
4
0
3

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

=

8
7
4

.

m
N

/

2

.

a

.

n
a
p
S

s

a

r

g
e

i

n
e
v

i

n

f

e
e

t

d
n
a

i

s
e
h
c
n

i
-
t
f
(

n

)

.

b

.

T

u
b
a

l

a

t

a
v
d
e

l

s
e
u

a

r

e

f

o

r

N

o

.

g
2

r

e
d
a

l

u

m

e
b

r

.

c

.

B

u

l
i

d

i

g
n

w

i

d

t

h

i

s

m

s
a
e

u

r

e
p
d
e

r

d
n
e
p

i

u
c

l

a

r

t

o

t

e
h

i
r

e
g
d

.

o
F

r

w

i

d

t

h

s

e
b

t

w

n
e
e

t

o
h

e
s

s

o
h

w

n

,

s

n
a
p

s

a

r

e
p
e

r

m

t
t
i

d
e

t

e
b
o

i

n

t

e

r

o
p

l

a

t

d
e

.

d

.

N

-
J

N

d
u
n
a
d
u

m

.
t
r
s
e
d
k
c
a
a
e
h
e
o
h
e
b
o

r
t

f

j

d
u

r
s

u
q
e

r
i

d
e

t

o

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

d
n
e
h
c
a
e

.

W

e
h

r

e

t

u
n
e
h

m

e
b

r

o

f

r

u
q
e

r
i

d
e

j

k
c
a

s

t

d
u

a
u
q
e
s

l

s

e
n
o

,

t

e
d
a
e
h
e
h

r

i

s

e
p

r

m

t
t
i

d
e

t

s
e
b
o

o
p
p
u

t
r

p
p
a
n
a
y
b
d
e

r

d
e
v
o

r
f

a

m

i

o
h
c
n
a
g
n

r

a

t
t

d
e
h
c
a

t

o

t

e
h

f

u

-
l
l

e
h

i

h
g

t

w

a

l
l

s

t

t

e

.

U

d
n
u
o
p
0
3
e
s

s

e
p

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

g

r

d
n
u
o

s

o
n

w

l

d
a
o

f

o

r

s
e
s
a
c

i

n

w

h

i

g
h
c

r

d
n
u
o

s

o
n

w

l

d
a
o

i

s

l

s
s
e

t

d
n
u
o
p
0
3
n
a
h

s

e
p

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

d
n
a

t

e
h

r

o
o

f

i
l

e
v

l

d
a
o

i

s

a
u
q
e

l

t

o
o

r

l

s
s
e

t

d
n
u
o
p
0
2
n
a
h

s

e
p

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

.
t

41

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:56 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

492

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

TABLE 2308.9.6
HEADER AND GIRDER SPANSa FOR INTERIOR BEARING WALLS
(Maximum Spans for Douglas Fir-Larch, Hem-Fir, Southern Pine and Spruce-Pine-Firb and Required Number of Jack Studs)

HEADERS AND GIRDERS
SUPPORTING

SIZE

BUILDING WIDTHc (feet)

20

28

36

Span

NJd

Span

NJd

Span

NJd

One Floor Only

2-2 ´ 4

3-1

1

2-8

1

2-5

1

2-2 ´ 6

4-6

1

3-11

1

3-6

1

2-2 ´ 8

5-9

1

5-0

2

4-5

2

2-2 ´10

7-0

2

6-1

2

5-5

2

2-2 ´12

8-1

2

7-0

2

6-3

2

3-2 ´ 8

7-2

1

6-3

1

5-7

2

3-2 ´10

8-9

1

7-7

2

6-9

2

3-2 ´12

10-2

2

8-10

2

7-10

2

4-2 ´ 8

9-0

1

7-8

1

6-9

1

4-2 ´10

10-1

1

8-9

1

7-10

2

4-2 ´12

11-9

1

10-2

2

9-1

2

Two Floors

2-2 ´ 4

2-2

1

1-10

1

1-7

1

2-2 ´ 6

3-2

2

2-9

2

2-5

2

2-2 ´ 8

4-1

2

3-6

2

3-2

2

2-2 ´10

4-11

2

4-3

2

3-10

3

2-2 ´12

5-9

2

5-0

3

4-5

3

3-2 ´ 8

5-1

2

4-5

2

3-11

2

3-2 ´10

6-2

2

5-4

2

4-10

2

3-2 ´12

7-2

2

6-3

2

5-7

3

4-2 ´ 8

6-1

1

5-3

2

4-8

2

4-2 ´10

7-2

2

6-2

2

5-6

2

4-2 ´12

8-4

2

7-2

2

6-5

2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Spans are given in feet and inches (ft-in).
b. Tabulated values are for No. 2 grade lumber.
c. Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated.
d. NJ - Number of jack studs required to support each end. Where the number of required jack studs equals one, the headers are permitted to be supported by an
approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header.

42

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:56 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

BASIC WIND SPEED
(3-second gust)

85
90
100
110

TABLE 2308.10.1
REQUIRED RATING OF APPROVED UPLIFT CONNECTORS (pounds)a, b, c, e, f, g, h

ROOF SPAN (feet)

12

-72
-91
-131
-175

20

-120
-151
-281
-292

24

-145
-181
-262
-351

28

-169
-212
-305
-409

32

-193
-242
-349
-467

36

-217
-272
-393
-526

40

-241
-302
-436
-584

OVERHANGS
(pounds/feet)d

-38.55
-43.22
-53.36
-64.56

For SI:
1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 1.61 km/hr, 1 pound = 0.454 Kg, 1 pound/foot = 14.5939 N/m.
a. The uplift connection requirements are based on a 30-foot mean roof height located in Exposure B. For Exposure C or D and for other mean roof heights, multiply
the above loads by the adjustment coefficients below.

EXPOSURE

B
C
D

15

1.00
1.21
1.47

20

1.00
1.29
1.55

25

1.00
1.35
1.61

Mean Roof Height (feet)
35
40

45

30

1.00
1.40
1.66

1.05
1.45
1.70

1.09
1.49
1.74

1.12
1.53
1.78

50

1.16
1.56
1.81

55

1.19
1.59
1.84

60

1.22
1.62
1.87

b. The uplift connection requirements are based on the framing being spaced 24 inches on center. Multiply by 0.67 for framing spaced 16 inches on center and multi-
ply by 0.5 for framing spaced 12 inches on center.
c. The uplift connection requirements include an allowance for 10 pounds of dead load.
d. The uplift connection requirements do not account for the effects of overhangs. The magnitude of the above loads shall be increased by adding the overhang loads
found in the table. The overhang loads are also based on framing spaced 24 inches on center. The overhang loads given shall be multiplied by the overhang projec-
tion and added to the roof uplift value in the table.
e. The uplift connection requirements are based upon wind loading on end zones as defined in Figure 6-2 of ASCE 7. Connection loads for connections located a dis-
tance of 20 percent of the least horizontal dimension of the building from the corner of the building are permitted to be reduced by multiplying the table connection
value by 0.7 and multiplying the overhang load by 0.8.
f. For wall-to-wall and wall-to-foundation connections, the capacity of the uplift connector is permitted to be reduced by 100 pounds for each full wall above. (For
example, if a 500-pound rated connector is used on the roof framing, a 400-pound rated connector is permitted at the next floor level down).
g. Interpolation is permitted for intermediate values of basic wind speeds and roof spans.
h. The rated capacity of approved tie-down devices is permitted to include up to a 60-percent increase for wind effects where allowed by material specifications.

2308.10.2 Ceiling joist spans. Allowable spans for ceiling
joists shall be in accordance with Table 2308.10.2(1) or
2308.10.2(2). For other grades and species, refer to the
AF&PA Span Tables for Joists and Rafters.

2308.10.3 Rafter spans. Allowable spans for rafters shall
be in accordance with Table 2308.10.3(1), 2308.10.3(2),
2308.10.3(3), 2308.10.3(4), 2308.10.3(5) or 2308.10.3(6).
For other grades and species, refer to the AF&PA Span
Tables for Joists and Rafters.

2308.10.4 Ceiling joist and rafter framing. Rafters
shall be framed directly opposite each other at the ridge.
There shall be a ridge board at least 1-inch (25 mm) nomi-
nal thickness at ridges and not less in depth than the cut
end of the rafter. At valleys and hips, there shall be a sin-
gle valley or hip rafter not less than 2-inch (51 mm) nomi-
nal thickness and not less in depth than the cut end of the
rafter.

2308.10.4.1 Ceiling joist and rafter connections. Ceil-
ing joists and rafters shall be nailed to each other and the
assembly shall be nailed to the top wall plate in accor-
dance with Tables 2304.9.1 and 2308.10.1. Ceiling joists
shall be continuous or securely joined where they meet
over interior partitions and fastened to adjacent rafters in
accordance with Tables 2308.10.4.1 and 2304.9.1 to pro-
vide a continuous rafter tie across the building where such
joists are parallel to the rafters. Ceiling joists shall have a

bearing surface of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) on the
top plate at each end.
Where ceiling joists are not parallel to rafters, an equiv-
alent rafter tie shall be installed in a manner to provide a
continuous tie across the building, at a spacing of not more
than 4 feet (1219 mm) o.c. The connections shall be in
accordance with Tables 2308.10.4.1 and 2304.9.1, or con-
nections of equivalent capacities shall be provided. Where
ceiling joists or rafter ties are not provided at the top of the
rafter support walls, the ridge formed by these rafters shall
also be supported by a girder conforming to Section
2308.4.
Rafter ties shall be spaced not more than 4 feet (1219
mm) o.c. Rafter tie connections shall be based on the
equivalent rafter spacing in Table 2308.10.4.1. Where
rafter ties are spaced at 32 inches (813 mm) o.c., the
number of 16d common nails shall be two times the num-
ber specified for rafters spaced 16 inches (406 mm) o.c.,
with a minimum of four 16d common nails where no
snow loads are indicated. Where rafter ties are spaced at
48 inches (1219 mm) o.c., the number of 16d common
nails shall be two times the number specified for rafters
spaced 24 inches (610 mm) o.c., with a minimum of six
16d common nails where no snow loads are indicated.
Rafter/ceiling joist connections and rafter/tie connec-
tions shall be of sufficient size and number to prevent
splitting from nailing.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

493

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:56 AM

43

494

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
O
M
M
O
C
e
R
g
E
O
a
L
F
o
B
S
A
S
N
T
A
u
P
o
S
h
T
S

2
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

1

)

e
L
E
b
a
C

l
I

I

G
N
A

s
J
c

O

I

0
4
2
=
D
L
S
E
s
C
p
E
s
P
d
S
n
u
R
o
E
p
B
0
1
=
L
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

U

M

I

(

U

b
a
h
n
n

i

t
i

i
t
t

W

t
i

t

t

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

L
E
C

I

I

G
N

G
N
C
A
P
S
s
T
e
S
h
c
n
J

O

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
5
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

e
c

i
l
i

g
n

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

3
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

2
1

-

8

9
1

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

2
1

-

5

9
1

-

6

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

0
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

2
1

-

5

9
1

-

6

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

2
1

-

2

9
1

-

1

5
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

1
1

-

7

8
1

-

2

4
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

0
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

2
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

2
1

-

8

9
1

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

2
1

-

5

9
1

-

6

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

1
1

-

6

7
1

-

0

1
2

-

8

5
2

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

2
1

-

2

9
1

-

1

5
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

1
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

8

4
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

1
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

8

4
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

0
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

1
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

9

4
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

1
1

-

6

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

9

-

5

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

1
1

-

0

7
1

-

4

2
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

9

-

5

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

1
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

4
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

1
1

-

6

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

0
1

-

0

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

1
1

-

0

7
1

-

4

2
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

9

6
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

9

6
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

9

-

5

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

3

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

44

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:57 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

495

WOOD

2
e
0
1
g
a
8
F
0
o
3
S
S
2
N
E
A
u
L
P
o
B
S
h
A
T
T
S

.

.

(

1

)

—

0
4
2
=
D
L
S
E
s
C
p
E
s
P
d
S
n
u
R
o
E
p
B
d
0
e
1
u
=
n
L
d
n
a
o
o
c
L
e
v
L

i
t

e
L
E
b
a
C

l
I

I

G
N
A

s
J
c

O

I

N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

U

b
a
h
n
n

i

t
i

i
t
t

W

t
i

t

t

r

,

i

,
f

/

)

L
E
C

I

I

G
N

G
N
C
A
P
S
s
T
e
S
h
c
n
J

O

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
5
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

e
c

i
l
i

g
n

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

0

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

7

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

8

1
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

4

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

1
1

5
1

-

7

0
2

-

6

5
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

1
1

-

0

7
1

-

4

2
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

0

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

8

1
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

0
2

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

4

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

2

5
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

2

5
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

2

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

6

2
2

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

1

3
2

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

8

-

2

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

8
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

45

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:57 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

496

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
O
M
M
O
C
R
E
O
L
F
e
g
B
S
a
A
N
T
o
A
P
S
S
d
T
e
S

2
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

2

)

L
E
s
c
C

I

I

G
N

J
L
h

O

t
i
I

a
S
u
E
q
C
s
E
P
e
p
S
s
R
d
E
n
B
u
o
p
0
L
2
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

U

M

I

(

U

b
a
h
n
n

i

t
i

e
b
a

l

A

i
t
t

W

t
i

i

m

t

r

,

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

L
E
C

I

I

G
N

G
N
C
A
P
S
s
T
e
S
h
c
n
J

O

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

e
c

i
l
i

g
n

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

2

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

6

2
2

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

1

3
2

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

8

-

2

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

6

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

7

5
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

8

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

4

2
1

-

8

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

8

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

4

4
1

-

7

9
1

-

3

4
2

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

1
1

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

8

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

46

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:58 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

497

WOOD

2
0
1
8
F
e
0
g
3
S
a
2
N
E
A
o
L
P
S
B
S
d
A
T
e
T
S

.

.

(

2

)

—

a
S
u
E
q
C
s
E
e
P
p
S
s
R
d
E
n
B
u
d
o
e
p
u
n
0
L
2
n
=
o
c
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

i
t

L
E
s
c
C

I

I

G
N

J
L
h

O

t
i
I

N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

U

b
a
h
n
n

i

t
i

e
b
a

l

A

i
t
t

W

t
i

i

m

t

r

,

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

L
E
C

I

I

G
N

G
N
C
A
P
S
s
T
e
S
h
c
n
J

O

I

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

e
c

i
l
i

g
n

j

s
o

i

t

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

0

8
1

-

5

3
2

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

3

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

6

8
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

7

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

5

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

5

9

-

6

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

1

1
2

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

1

0
2

-

1
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

2

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

6

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

1
2

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

2

6
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

5

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

0
1

2
1

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

2

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

2

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

3

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

8
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

47

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:58 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

498

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
O
C
M
M
O
C
E
L
R
B
O
a
A
u
F
T
q
S
s
N
A
e
p
P
S
s
d
R
n
E
u
T
o
F
p
0
2
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

1
g
L
n
3
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
R
A
E
B
o
N
U

M

I

(

R

o
o

f

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

e

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

1
1

-

6

8
1

-

0

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

1
1

-

6

8
1

-

0

3
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

1
1

-

1

7
1

-

4

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

6

5
1

-

4

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

0
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

7

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

0

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

0

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

8

1
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

3

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

1

5
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

1
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

3
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

1
1

-

1

7
1

-

4

2
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

1
1

-

1

7
1

-

3

1
2

-

9

5
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

0
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

0

2
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

6

5
1

-

1

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

1

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

8

1
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

7

6
1

-

8

1
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

0
1

-

4

6
1

-

3

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

0
1

-

4

6
1

-

3

1
2

-

0

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

0

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

4

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

7

3
2

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

9
1

-

1
1

4
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

8

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

0
1

2
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

5

0
2

-

0

3
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

8

-

5

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

6

8
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

5
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

0

8
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

1

3
2

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

2

8
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

48

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:08:59 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

499

WOOD

3
0
1
8
0
a
3
u
2
F
q
E
S
s
L
N
B
e
A
A
p
P
T
S
s
d
R
n
E
u
T
o
F
p
0
2
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

.

.

(

1

)

—

n
g
o
L
n
c

i
t

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
d
R
A
e
E
u
B
n
o
N
U

A
R

N
O
C
M
M
O
C
R
O

M

I

(

R

o
o

f

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

e

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

5

0
2

-

4

5
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

7

8
1

-

6

2
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

0

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

8

5
2

-

2

8

-

4

2
1

-

2

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

3

4
1

-

7

9
1

-

2

4
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

3

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

8

7
1

-

4

1
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

8

-

1

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

0

8
1

-

4

1
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

8

2
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

4

0
2

-

0

3
2

-

2

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

3

3
1

-

8

7
1

-

2

0
2

-

5

4
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

3

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

2

4
2

-

0
1

8

-

4

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

4

1
2

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

6

-

3

9

-

3

1
1

-

9

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

1

4
1

-

3

8
1

-

9

3
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

4
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

0
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

7

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

4

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

6

8
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

1
1

7

-

3

0
1

-

7

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

7

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

9

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

8

5
1

-

6

7
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

2
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

1

5
2

-

2

8

-

3

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

3

1
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

2

7

-

5

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

5

9

-

6

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

8

5
2

-

2

8

-

4

2
1

-

2

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

49

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:00 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

500

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
O
C
M
M
O
C
E
L
R
B
O
a
A
u
F
T
q
S
s
N
A
e
p
P
S
s
d
R
n
E
u
T
o
F
p
0
2
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

2
g
L
n
3
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
R
A
E
B
o
N
U

M

I

(

R

o
o

f

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

e

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

1
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

4

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

5
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

2

4
1

-

5

9
1

-

0

4
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

1
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

0
1

5
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

1

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

4
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

5

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

5

4
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

4
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

5

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

6

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

7

5
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

6

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

7

4
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

3
1

-

3

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

7

3
2

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

9

2
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

5

0
2

-

0

3
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

4

3
1

-

1

7
1

-

3

1
2

-

1
1

5
2

-

5

8

-

4

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

6

8
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

4

4
1

-

7

9
1

-

3

4
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

4

4
1

-

7

9
1

-

3

4
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

1
1

4
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

4

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

1

3
2

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

2

8
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

5

7
1

-

9

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

5

7
1

-

9

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

8

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

50

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:00 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

501

WOOD

3
0
1
8
0
a
3
u
2
F
q
E
S
s
L
N
B
e
A
A
p
P
T
S
s
d
R
n
E
u
T
o
F
p
0
2
=
d
a
o
L
e
v
L

.

.

(

2

)

—

n
g
o
L
n
c

i
t

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
d
R
A
e
E
u
B
n
o
N
U

A
R

N
O
C
M
M
O
C
R
O

M

I

(

R

o
o

f

i

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

e

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

t
f
(

.

-

i

n

.

)

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

0

8
1

-

5

3
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

0

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

7

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

8

5
2

-

2

8

-

4

2
1

-

2

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

5

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

5
2

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

1

1
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

8

-

1

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

0

8
1

-

4

1
2

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

4

6
1

-

3

0
2

-

0

3
2

-

2

7

-

8

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

3
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

9

2
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

2

0
2

-

5

4
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

2

4
2

-

0
1

8

-

4

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

4

1
2

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

6

-

3

9

-

3

1
1

-

9

3
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

1

1
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

1

1
2

-

0

4
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

1

2
1

-

8

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

1

2
1

-

8

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

6

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

9

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

7
1

-

9

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

7

0
2

-

3

3
2

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

1

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

6

8
1

-

1
1

1
2

-

1
1

7

-

3

0
1

-

7

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

4

9
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

9

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

8

5
1

-

6

7
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

1

5
2

-

2

8

-

0

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

3

1
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

1
1

2
2

-

2

7

-

5

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

5

9

-

6

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

2

4
2

-

7

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

3

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

8

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

51

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:01 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

502

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
C
O
M
M
O
C
E
a
L
R
u
B
O
q
A
F
s
T
S
e
N
p
A
s
P
d
S
n
R
u
o
E
p
T
F
0
3
=
d
a
o
L

g
n
3
L
3
e
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

U

M

o
S
d
E
e
h
C
c
E
a
P
S
A
R
E
o
B
N

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

R

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

0
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

0
2

-

1

4
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

9

-

8

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

8

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

8

0
2

-

4

3
2

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

9

-

5

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

5

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

6

4
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

7

5
2

-

0

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

6

4
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

7

4
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

3

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

2

5
2

-

9

8

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0
1

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

0

4
2

-

4

8

-

4

2
1

-

2

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0
1

5
1

-

6

0
2

-

5

N

o

t

e

a

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

9

-

8

5
1

-

2

0
2

-

0

4
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

8

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

8

2
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

9

-

6

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

8

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

0

2
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

8

9
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

7

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

3

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

0

6

-

9

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

9

-

3

4
1

-

7

9
1

-

2

4
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

3

4
1

-

7

8
1

-

8

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

5

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

9

-

1

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

5

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

3
1

-

9

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

9

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

2

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

1

0
2

-

0
1

4
2

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

5

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

3

7

-

7

1
1

-

1

4
1

-

1

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

1

7

-

2

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

4

6
1

-

3

8
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

1

1
2

-

5

5
2

-

7

8

-

8

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

2

2
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

7

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

7

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

5

-

0
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

1

5
2

-

7

8

-

5

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

2

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

2

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

52

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:02 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

503

WOOD

3
0
1
8
a
0
u
3
q
2
F
s
E
S
e
L
N
p
B
A
A
s
P
T
d
S
n
R
u
E
o
T
p
F
0
3
=
d
a
o
L

.

.

(

3

)

—

g
n
n
o
L
c
e

i
t

o
S
d
E
e
h
C
c
E
a
P
S
A
d
R
e
E
o
u
B
N
n

A
R

N
C
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

R

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

9

1
2

-

8

5
2

-

2

8

-

7

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

1

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

9

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

4

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

7

9
1

-

3

6

-

7

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

0

5
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

4

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

7

7

-

1

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

0
1

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

1
1

2
1

-

5

6
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

3
2

-

4

7

-

1
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

5

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

1
1

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

8

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

6

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

7

-

6

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

0

9
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

6

-

2

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

0

6
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

7

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

1

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

8

3
2

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

1

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

6

-

4

9

-

2

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

4

-

9

7

-

1

9

-

0

0
1

-

8

2
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

4

1
1

-

7

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

53

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:03 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

504

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

N
C
O
M
M
O
C
E
a
L
R
u
B
O
q
A
F
s
T
S
e
N
p
A
s
P
d
S
n
R
u
o
E
p
T
F
0
5
=
d
a
o
L

g
n
4
L
3
e
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

U

M

o
S
d
E
e
h
C
c
E
a
P
S
A
R
E
o
B
N

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

R

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

6

2
2

-

4

6
2

-

0

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

4
2

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

2

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

3

8
1

-

7

1
2

-

7

7

-

7

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

1

5
2

-

6

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

0
2

-

4

3
2

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

1

1
2

-

0

7

-

5

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

5

1
1

-

1

4
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

7

-

0

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

4

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

4

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

1
1

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

1

8

-

2

2
1

-

6

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

0

1
1

-

9

5
1

-

3

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

3

7

-

7

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

2

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

4

5

-

9

8

-

5

0
1

-

9

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

4
2

-

1

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

8

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

7

-

8

1
1

-

7

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

7

9

-

8

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

7

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

6

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1
1

4
2

-

3

7

-

6

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

5

1
1

-

7

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

4

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

8

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

6

-

7

9

-

5

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

4

-

1
1

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

1

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

8

6
1

-

8

9
1

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

54

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:04 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

505

WOOD

3
0
1
8
a
0
u
3
q
2
F
s
E
S
e
L
N
p
B
A
A
s
P
T
d
S
n
R
u
E
o
T
p
F
0
5
=
d
a
o
L

.

.

(

4

)

—

g
n
n
o
L
c
e

i
t

o
S
d
E
e
h
C
c
E
a
P
S
A
d
R
e
E
o
u
B
N
n

A
R

N
C
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

U

M

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t

t
t

t

R

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
8
1
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

3

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

6

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

6

7

-

3

0
1

-

7

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

6

-

6

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

1

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

4

9

-

3

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

4

6
1

-

7

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

0

8

-

9

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

5

-

7

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

7

1
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

0

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

6

-

8

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

6

-

6

9

-

4

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

4

6
1

-

0
1

6

-

0

8

-

8

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

4

-

1
1

7

-

3

9

-

2

0
1

-

0
1

2
1

-

1
1

4

-

6

6

-

8

8

-

6

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

0

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

8

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1

6

-

8

9

-

0
1

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

6

-

8

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

4

6

-

6

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

4

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

7

8
1

-

0

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

5

-

8

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

4

7

-

0
1

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

1

4

-

1
1

7

-

3

9

-

2

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

8

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

0

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

8

6
1

-

7

9
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

6

-

5

9

-

7

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

1

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

4

0
1

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

5

-

5

7

-

9

0
1

-

0

1
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

4

-

4

6

-

5

8

-

3

9

-

9

1
1

-

7

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

0

0
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

2

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

1

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

55

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:05 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

506

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

U
C
N
O
M
M
O
C
E
L
R
B
O
A
F
e
T
S
p
N
s
A
d
P
n
S
u
o
R
p
E
0
T
3
F
=
d
a
o
L

5
e
L
3
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

M

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
R
A
E
B
g
n

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

0
1

4
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

9

-

1

4
1

-

4

8
1

-

0
1

4
2

-

1

N

o

t

e

a

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

9

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

8

0
2

-

4

3
2

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

5

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

9

N

o

t

e

a

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

2

5
2

-

9

8

-

5

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

3

9
1

-

0
1

3
2

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

7

1
2

-

0

4
2

-

4

8

-

0

2
1

-

2

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

1
2

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

8
1

-

6

3
2

-

8

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

2

3
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

9

3
1

-

9

8
1

-

2

2
2

-

2

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

8

-

7

3
1

-

6

7
1

-

0
1

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

7

2
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

8

9
1

-

1
1

3
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

7

-

7

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

3

6
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

0

6

-

9

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

5

3
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

2
2

-

3

N

o

t

e

a

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

0

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

3

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

8

-

3

2
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

0

1
2

-

4

4
2

-

8

8

-

3

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

0
1

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

3

3
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

1
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

5

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

5
2

-

1

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

0
2

-

8

4
2

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

9

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

3

7

-

7

1
1

-

1

4
1

-

1

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

1
1

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

1

7

-

2

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

4

6
1

-

3

8
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

8

-

1

2
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

1
2

-

6

N

o

t

e

a

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

1
2

-

1

5
2

-

7

8

-

0

2
1

-

6

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

2

2
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

0
1

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

3

2
2

-

7

7

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

7

9

-

8

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

5

-

0
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

2

4
2

-

7

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

i

2
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

5
1

-

1

8
1

-

5

1
2

-

5

7

-

3

0
1

-

8

3
1

-

6

6
1

-

6

9
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

i

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

5

-

6

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

6

4
1

-

6

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

56

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:06 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

507

WOOD

3
0
1
8
0
3
2
F
e
E
S
p
L
N
s
B
A
d
A
P
n
T
u
S
o
R
p
E
0
T
3
F
=
d
a
o
L

.

.

(

5

)

—

n
e
o
L
c

i
t

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
d
R
A
e
E
u
B
g
n
n

A
R

U
C
N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

M

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

9

2
1

-

3

6
1

-

1

0
2

-

7

5
2

-

0

7

-

9

2
1

-

3

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

5

2
2

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

4

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

4

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

9
1

-

5

3
2

-

7

7

-

4

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

2

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

4

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

7

6
1

-

7

9
1

-

3

6

-

7

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

2

4
2

-

7

7

-

8

2
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

0
2

-

2

4
2

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

5
1

-

6

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

4

7

-

6

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

4

1
1

-

5

4
1

-

9

7
1

-

7

0
2

-

7

7

-

1

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

0
1

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

2

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

1
1

9
1

-

0

3
2

-

1

7

-

2

1
1

-

4

4
1

-

9

8
1

-

0

0
2

-

1
1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

0

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

7

-

0

0
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

6

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

3

1
1

-

4

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

2
2

-

6

7

-

3

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

2

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

0

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

8

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

0

1
2

-

1
1

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

0

9
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

8

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

6

-

2

9

-

1

1
1

-

6

4
1

-

0

6
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

4

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

0

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

7

-

0

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

6

-

4

9

-

2

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

6

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

4

-

9

7

-

1

9

-

0

0
1

-

8

2
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

8

0
1

-

6

3
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

0
2

-

1
1

6

-

8

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

6

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

6

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

5

-

1
1

8

-

8

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

6

5
1

-

7

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

6

6

-

7

8

-

4

0
1

-

2

1
1

-

0
1

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

a

.

d
e
e
c
x
e
n
a
p
S

s

6
2

f

e
e

t

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

.

C

k
c
e
h

s

u
o

r

s
e
c

f

o

r

a
v
a

l
i

b
a

t
i
l
i

o
y

f

l

u

m

e
b

r

i

n

l

g
n
e

t

h

s

g

r

a
e

t

e

r

t

0
2
n
a
h

f

e
e

.
t

57

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:07 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

508

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

U
C
N
O
M
M
O
C
E
L
R
B
O
A
F
e
T
S
p
N
s
A
d
P
n
S
u
o
R
p
E
0
T
5
F
=
d
a
o
L

6
e
L
3
0
1
8
0
3
2

.

.

(

)

A
R

M

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
R
A
E
B
g
n

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

8

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

8

7

-

8

2
1

-

1

5
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

3

4
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

7

-

5

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

3

8
1

-

7

1
2

-

7

7

-

5

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

7
1

-

3

0
2

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

7

-

3

1
1

-

3

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

7

-

1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

2

3
2

-

4

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

5
1

-

0

9
1

-

2

3
2

-

4

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

1

1
2

-

0

7

-

1

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

9

9
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

9

0
1

-

8

4
1

-

0

7
1

-

2

9
1

-

1
1

6

-

9

0
1

-

3

3
1

-

0

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

7

-

6

1
1

-

0

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1
1

4
2

-

3

7

-

6

1
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

7

9
1

-

1
1

4
2

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

7

-

5

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

9
1

-

7

3
2

-

9

7

-

5

1
1

-

7

5
1

-

4

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

7

-

3

1
1

-

5

5
1

-

0

8
1

-

2

1
2

-

3

7

-

3

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

1

6
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

6

-

2

9

-

2

1
1

-

8

3
1

-

9

6
1

-

4

5

-

9

8

-

5

0
1

-

9

2
1

-

9

5
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

0
1

7

-

1

1
1

-

2

4
1

-

8

8
1

-

9

2
2

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

3

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

2

6

-

1
1

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

6
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

7

-

0

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

5

8
1

-

5

2
2

-

5

7

-

0

1
1

-

0

4
1

-

5

7
1

-

1
1

0
2

-

0
1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

6

-

9

0
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

6

-

7

9

-

8

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

3

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

7

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

8

7
1

-

5

1
2

-

2

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

8

7
1

-

5

0
2

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

5

0
1

-

2

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

8

8
1

-

2

6

-

5

9

-

5

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

6

6
1

-

0
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

2

9

-

7

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

3

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

1

2
2

-

0

6

-

0
1

0
1

-

9

4
1

-

2

8
1

-

1

2
2

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

6

-

9

0
1

-

7

3
1

-

1
1

7
1

-

6

0
2

-

1
1

6

-

9

0
1

-

7

3
1

-

8

6
1

-

2

9
1

-

4

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

6

-

7

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

9

8
1

-

5

6

-

7

9

-

5

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

7

7
1

-

1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

5

-

4

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

4
1

-

2

4

-

1
1

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

0

3
1

-

1

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

5

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

6

-

5

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

6
1

-

8

9
1

-

4

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

4

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

6

-

4

9

-

9

2
1

-

4

5
1

-

1

7
1

-

6

6

-

2

9

-

0

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

1
1

6
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

4

-

8

6

-

0
1

8

-

8

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

3

(

c

n
o

i
t

u
n

e

d

)

58

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:08 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

509

WOOD

3
0
1
8
0
3
2
F
e
E
S
p
L
N
s
B
A
d
A
P
n
T
u
S
o
R
p
E
0
T
5
F
=
d
a
o
L

.

.

(

6

)

—

n
e
o
L
c

i
t

R
S
o
E
d
C
e
E
h
P
c
S
a
d
R
A
e
E
u
B
g
n
n

A
R

U
C
N
O
M
M
O
C
R
O

M

I

(

G

r

o
n
S
d
n
u
o

w

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

,
t

i
l
i

t
t

t

a

t
f

e

r

s

,

L/

0
4
2
=
D

)

G
R
N
s
E
e
T
C
h
F
c
A
A
n
P
R
S

I

i
(

)

E
D
A
R
G
D
N
A
S
E
C
E
P
S

I

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
1
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

D
A
E
D

L

D
A
O

e
p
s
d
n
u
o
p
0
2
=

r

a
u
q
s

r

e

f

o
o

t

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

4
×
2

6
×
2

8
×
2

0
1
×
2

2
1
×
2

M

x
a

i

m

u

m

r

a

t
f

e

r

s
n
a
p
s

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

.
t
f
(

-

i

n

)
.

2
9
1

.

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

7

7
1

-

4

0
2

-

6

6

-

7

0
1

-

4

3
1

-

5

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

6

-

4

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

1

6

-

0

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

6

-

1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

2

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

5

9
1

-

1
1

6

-

2

9

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

6
1

-

1

8
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

6

-

1

9

-

3

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

4

6
1

-

7

5

-

0
1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

5

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

9

8

-

9

1
1

-

1

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

5

-

7

8

-

1

0
1

-

3

2
1

-

7

4
1

-

7

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

6

-

5

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

6

-

5

0
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

7
1

-

0

0
2

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

6

-

4

9

-

1
1

3
1

-

1

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

6

-

4

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

5

4
1

-

0
1

7
1

-

8

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

6

-

2

9

-

4

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

4

6
1

-

0
1

6

-

0

8

-

8

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

4

5
1

-

7

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

4

-

1
1

7

-

3

9

-

2

0
1

-

0
1

2
1

-

1
1

4

-

6

6

-

8

8

-

6

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

0

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

6

-

1

9

-

6

2
1

-

7

6
1

-

0

9
1

-

1

6

-

1

9

-

6

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

3

7
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

5

-

1
1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

1
1

8

-

1
1

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

9

5
1

-

1
1

5

-

7

8

-

3

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

9

4
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

7

6

-

9

8

-

6

0
1

-

5

2
1

-

1

4

-

3

6

-

3

7

-

1
1

9

-

7

1
1

-

2

4
2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

S
S

6

-

1

9

-

7

2
1

-

7

5
1

-

0
1

8
1

-

4

6

-

1

9

-

6

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

0

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

1
#

5

-

0
1

8

-

6

0
1

-

9

3
1

-

2

5
1

-

3

5

-

5

7

-

0
1

0
1

-

0

2
1

-

2

4
1

-

1

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

2
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

D

g
u
o

l

s
a

F

-
r
i

L

a

r

h
c

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

S
S

5

-

9

9

-

1

1
1

-

1
1

5
1

-

2
1

8
1

-

0

5

-

9

9

-

1

1
1

-

9

4
1

-

5

6
1

-

8

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

1
#

5

-

8

8

-

3

0
1

-

6

2
1

-

0
1

4
1

-

0
1

5

-

3

7

-

8

9

-

9

1
1

-

0
1

3
1

-

9

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

4

7

-

0
1

9

-

1
1

2
1

-

1

4
1

-

1

4

-

1
1

7

-

3

9

-

2

1
1

-

3

3
1

-

0

H

e

m

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

S
S

6

-

0

9

-

5

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

3

6

-

0

9

-

5

2
1

-

5

5
1

-

0
1

9
1

-

3

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

1
#

5

-

0
1

9

-

3

2
1

-

0

4
1

-

4

7
1

-

1

5

-

0
1

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

3

5
1

-

9

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

2
#

5

-

9

8

-

4

0
1

-

9

2
1

-

0
1

5
1

-

1

5

-

5

7

-

9

0
1

-

0

1
1

-

1
1

3
1

-

1
1

u
o
S

t

e
h

r

P
n

i

e
n

3
#

4

-

4

6

-

5

8

-

3

9

-

9

1
1

-

7

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

0

0
1

-

8

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

P

i

e
n

-

F

r
i

S
S

5

-

8

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

8

4
1

-

8

7
1

-

1

5

-

8

8

-

0
1

1
1

-

2

3
1

-

7

5
1

-

9

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

1
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

2
#

5

-

5

7

-

1
1

0
1

-

1

2
1

-

4

4
1

-

3

5

-

0

7

-

4

9

-

4

1
1

-

5

3
1

-

2

p
S

r

e
c
u

-

e
n
P

i

-

F

r
i

3
#

4

-

1

6

-

0

7

-

7

9

-

4

0
1

-

9

3

-

0
1

5

-

7

7

-

1

8

-

7

0
1

-

0

o
F

r

S

:
I

1

i

4
5
2
=
h
c
n

.

m
m

,

1

f

o
o

t

8
4
0
3
=

.

m
m

,

e
p
d
n
u
o
p
1

r

s

a
u
q

r

e

f

o
o

t

9
7
4
=

.

m
N

/

.
2

59

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:08 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

510

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

WOOD

TABLE 2308.10.4.1
RAFTER TIE CONNECTIONSg

RAFTER
SLOPE

TIE SPACING
(inches)

NO SNOW LOAD

GROUND SNOW LOAD (pound per square foot)

30 pounds per square foot

50 pounds per square foot

Roof span (feet)

12

20

28
36
12
20
28
36
12
20
Required number of 16d common (31/2² x 0.162²) nailsa, b per connectionc, d, e, f

28

36

3:12

12

4

6

8

10

4

6

8

11

5

8

12

15

16

5

7

10

13

5

8

11

14

6

11

15

20

24

7

11

15

19

7

11

16

21

9

16

23

30

32

10

14

19

25

10

16

22

28

12

27

30

40

48

14

21

29

37

14

32

36

42

18

32

46

60

4:12

12

3

4

5

6

3

5

6

8

4

6

9

11

16

3

5

7

8

4

6

8

11

5

8

12

15

24

4

7

10

12

5

9

12

16

7

12

17

22

32

6

9

13

16

8

12

16

22

10

16

24

30

48

8

14

19

24

10

18

24

32

14

24

34

44

5:12

12

3

3

4

5

3

4

5

7

3

5

7

9

16

3

4

5

7

3

5

7

9

4

7

9

12

24

4

6

8

10

4

7

10

13

6

10

14

18

32

5

8

10

13

6

10

14

18

8

14

18

24

48

7

11

15

20

8

14

20

26

12

20

28

36

7:12

12

3

3

3

4

3

3

4

5

3

4

5

7

16

3

3

4

5

3

4

5

6

3

5

7

9

24

3

4

6

7

3

5

7

9

4

7

10

13

32

4

6

8

10

4

8

10

12

6

10

14

18

48

5

8

11

14

6

10

14

18

9

14

20

26

9:12

12

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

4

3

3

4

5

16

3

3

3

4

3

3

4

5

3

4

5

7

24

3

3

5

6

3

4

6

7

3

6

8

10

32

3

4

6

8

4

6

8

10

5

8

10

14

48

4

6

9

11

5

8

12

14

7

12

16

20

12:12

12

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

4

16

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

4

3

3

4

5

24

3

3

3

4

3

3

4

6

3

4

6

8

32

3

3

4

5

3

5

6

8

4

6

8

10

48

3

4

6

7

4

7

8

12

6

8

12

16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 47.8 N/m2.
a. 40d box (5² ´ 0.162²) or l6d sinker (31/4² ´ 0.148²) nails are permitted to be substituted for 16d common (31/2² ´ 0.16²) nails.
b. Nailing requirements are permitted to be reduced 25 percent if nails are clinched.
c. Rafter tie heel joint connections are not required where the ridge is supported by a load-bearing wall, header or ridge beam.
d. When intermediate support of the rafter is provided by vertical struts or purlins to a load-bearing wall, the tabulated heel joint connection requirements are permit-
ted to be reduced proportionally to the reduction in span.
e. Equivalent nailing patterns are required for ceiling joist to ceiling joist lap splices.
f. Connected members shall be of sufficient size to prevent splitting due to nailing.
g. For snow loads less than 30 pounds per square foot, the required number of nails is permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the ratio of actual snow load plus 10
divided by 40, but not less than the number required for no snow load.

60

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:09 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

2308.10.4.2 Notches and holes. Notching at the ends
of rafters or ceiling joists shall not exceed one-fourth
the depth. Notches in the top or bottom of the rafter or
ceiling joist shall not exceed one-sixth the depth and
shall not be located in the middle one-third of the span,
except that a notch not exceeding one-third of the depth
is permitted in the top of the rafter or ceiling joist not
further from the face of the support than the depth of the
member.
Holes bored in rafters or ceiling joists shall not be
within 2 inches (51 mm) of the top and bottom and their
diameter shall not exceed one-third the depth of the
member.
2308.10.4.3 Framing around openings. Trimmer and
header rafters shall be doubled, or of lumber of equiva-
lent cross section, where the span of the header exceeds 4
feet (1219 mm). The ends of header rafters more than 6
feet (1829 mm) long shall be supported by framing
anchors or rafter hangers unless bearing on a beam, parti-
tion or wall.
2308.10.5 Purlins. Purlins to support roof loads are permit-
ted to be installed to reduce the span of rafters within allow-
able limits and shall be supported by struts to bearing walls.
The maximum span of 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm)
purlins shall be 4 feet (1219 mm). The maximum span of the
2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) purlin shall be 6 feet
(1829 mm), but in no case shall the purlin be smaller than
the supported rafter. Struts shall not be smaller than 2-inch
by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) members. The unbraced
length of struts shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 mm) and the
minimum slope of the struts shall not be less than 45 degrees
(0.79 rad) from the horizontal.
2308.10.6 Blocking. Roof rafters and ceiling joists shall be
supported laterally to prevent rotation and lateral displace-
ment in accordance with the provisions of Section 2308.8.5.
2308.10.7 Engineered wood products. Prefabricated
wood I-joists, structural glued-laminated timber and struc-
tural composite lumber shall not be notched or drilled
except where permitted by the manufacturer’s recommen-
dations or where the effects of such alterations are specifi-
cally considered in the design of the member by a registered
design professional.

2308.10.8 Roof sheathing. Roof sheathing shall be in
accordance with Tables 2304.7(3) and 2304.7(5) for wood
structural panels, and Tables 2304.7(1) and 2304.7(2) for
lumber and shall comply with Section 2304.7.2.
2308.10.8.1 Joints. Joints in lumber sheathing shall
occur over supports unless approved end-matched lum-
ber is used, in which case each piece shall bear on at least
two supports.
2308.10.9 Roof planking. Planking shall be designed in
accordance with the general provisions of this code.
In lieu of such design, 2-inch (51 mm) tongue-and-
groove planking is permitted in accordance with Table
2308.10.9. Joints in such planking are permitted to be ran-
domly spaced, provided the system is applied to not less
than three continuous spans, planks are center matched and

end matched or splined, each plank bears on at least one sup-
port, and joints are separated by at least 24 inches (610 mm)
in adjacent pieces.
2308.10.10 Wood trusses. Wood trusses shall be designed
in accordance with Section 2303.4.
2308.10.11 Attic ventilation. For attic ventilation, see Sec-
tion 1203.2.
2308.11 Additional requirements for conventional con-
struction in Seismic Design Category B or C. Structures of

conventional light-frame construction in Seismic Design Cate-
gory B or C, as determined in Section 1613, shall comply with
Sections 2308.11.1 through 2308.11.3, in addition to the provi-
sions of Sections 2308.1 through 2308.10.
2308.11.1 Number of stories. Structures of conventional

light-frame construction shall not exceed two stories above
grade plane in Seismic Design Category C.

2308.11.2 Concrete or masonry. Concrete or masonry
walls and stone or masonry veneer shall not extend above a
basement.
Exceptions:
1. Stone and masonry veneer is permitted to be used
in the first two stories above grade plane or the
first three stories above grade plane where the
lowest story has concrete or masonry walls in Seis-
mic Design Category B, provided that structural
use panel wall bracing is used and the length of
bracing provided is one- and one-half times the
r e q u i r e d l e n g t h a s d e t e r m i n e d i n T a b l e
2308.9.3(1).
2. Stone and masonry veneer is permitted to be used
in the first story above grade plane or the first two
stories above grade plane where the lowest story
has concrete or masonry walls in Seismic Design
Category B or C.
3. Stone and masonry veneer is permitted to be used
in both stories of buildings with two stories above
grade plane in Seismic Design Categories B and
C, provided the following criteria are met:
3.1. Type of brace per Section 2308.9.3 shall be
Method 3 and the allowable shear capacity
in accordance with Table 2306.3 shall be a
minimum of 350 plf (5108 N/m).
3.2. Braced wall panels in the second story
shall be located in accordance with Section
2308.9.3 and not more than 25 feet (7620
mm) on center, and the total length of
braced wall panels shall be not less than 25
percent of the braced wall line length.
Braced wall panels in the first story shall be
l o c a t e d i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
2308.9.3 and not more than 25 feet (7620
mm) on center, and the total length of
braced wall panels shall be not less than 45
percent of the braced wall line length.
3.3. Hold-down connectors shall be provided at
the ends of each braced wall panel for the

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

511

23_ibc_2009pg511.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 11:13:31 AM

61

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

allowable design of 2,000 pounds (8896
N). Hold-down connectors shall be pro-
vided at the ends of each braced wall panel
for the first story to foundation connection
w i th an a l low ab le cap ac t iy o f 3 ,900
pounds (17 347 N) . In all cases , the

hold-down connector force shall be trans-
ferred to the foundation.
3.4. Cripple walls shall not be permitted.
2308.11.3 Framing and connection details. Framing and
connection details shall conform to Sections 2308.11.3.1
through 2308.11.3.3.

TABLE 2308.10.9
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR 2-INCH TONGUE-AND-GROOVE DECKING

SPANa
(feet)

LIVE LOAD
(pound per square foot)

DEFLECTION LIMIT

Roofs

BENDING STRESS (f)
(pound per square inch)

MODULUS OF ELASTICITY (E)
(pound per square inch)

4

4.5

5.0

5.5

6.0

6.5

20

30

40

20

30

40

20

30

40

20

30

40

20

30

40

20

30

40

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

(continued)

160

210

270

200

270

350

250

330

420

300

400

500

360

480

600

420

560

700

170,000
256,000

256,000
384,000

340,000
512,000

242,000
305,000

363,000
405,000

484,000
725,000

332,000
500,000

495,000
742,000

660,000
1,000,000

442,000
660,000

662,000
998,000

884,000
1,330,000

575,000
862,000

862,000
1,295,000

1,150,000
1,730,000

595,000
892,000

892,000
1,340,000

1,190,000
1,730,000

512

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009pg511-512.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 10:16:01 AM

62

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 2308.10.9–continued
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR 2-INCH TONGUE-AND-GROOVE DECKING

SPANa
(feet)

LIVE LOAD
(pound per square foot)

DEFLECTION LIMIT

Roofs

BENDING STRESS (f)
(pound per square inch)

MODULUS OF ELASTICITY (E)
(pound per square inch)

WOOD

7.0

7.5

8.0

4
4.5
5.0

20

30

40

20

30

40

20

30

40

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

1/240
1/360

Floors

1/360

490

650

810

560

750

930

640

850

840
950
1,060

910,000
1,360,000

1,370,000
2,000,000

1,820,000
2,725,000

1,125,000
1,685,000

1,685,000
2,530,000

2,250,000
3,380,000

1,360,000
2,040,000

2,040,000
3,060,000

1,000,000
1,300,000
1,600,000

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 N/mm2.
a. Spans are based on simple beam action with 10 pounds per square foot dead load and provisions for a 300-pound concentrated load on a 12-inch width of decking.
Random layup is permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 2308.10.9. Lumber thickness is 11/2 inches nominal.

2308.11.3.1 Anchorage. Braced wall lines shall be
anchored in accordance with Section 2308.6 at founda-
tions.
2308.11.3.2 Stepped footings. Where the height of a
required braced wall panel extending from foundation to
floor above varies more than 4 feet (1219 mm), the fol-
lowing construction shall be used:
1. Where the bottom of the footing is stepped and the
lowest floor framing rests directly on a sill bolted
to the footings, the sill shall be anchored as
required in Section 2308.3.3.
2. Where the lowest floor framing rests directly on a
sill bolted to a footing not less than 8 feet (2438
mm) in length along a line of bracing, the line shall
be considered to be braced. The double plate of the
cripple stud wall beyond the segment of footing
extending to the lowest framed floor shall be spliced
to the sill plate with metal ties, one on each side of
the sill and plate. The metal ties shall not be less than
0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)] by 11/2
inches (38 mm) wide by 48 inches (1219 mm) with
eight 16d common nails on each side of the splice
location (see Figure 2308.11.3.2). The metal tie
shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 pounds per
square inch (psi) (227 MPa).

3. Where cripple walls occur between the top of the
footing and the lowest floor framing, the bracing
requirements for a story shall apply.

2308.11.3.3 Openings in horizontal diaphragms.
Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension per-
pendicular to the joist that is greater than 4 feet (1219 mm)
shall be constructed in accordance with the following:

1. Blocking shall be provided beyond headers.
2. Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16
galvanized gage)] by 11/2 inches (38 mm) wide
with eight 16d common nails on each side of the
header-joist intersection shall be provided (see
Figure 2308.11.3.3). The metal ties shall have a
minimum yield of 33,000 psi (227 MPa).

2308.12 Additional requirements for conventional construc-
tion in Seismic Design Category D or E. Structures of conven-

tional light-frame construction in Seismic Design Category D or
E, as determined in Section 1613, shall conform to Sections
2308.12.1 through 2308.12.9, in addition to the requirements
for Seismic Design Category B or C in Section 2308.11.

2308.12.1 Number of stories. Structures of conventional

light-frame construction shall not exceed one story above
grade plane in Seismic Design Category D or E.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

513

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:10 AM

63

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.11.3.2
STEPPED FOOTING CONNECTION DETAILS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.11.3.3
OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS

514

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:13 AM

64

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2308.12.2 Concrete or masonry. Concrete or masonry
walls and stone or masonry veneer shall not extend above a
basement.
Exception: Stone and masonry veneer is permitted to be
used in the first story above grade plane in Seismic Design
Category D, provided the following criteria are met:
1. Type of brace in accordance with Section 2308.9.3
shall be Method 3 and the allowable shear capacity
in accordance with Table 2306.3 shall be a mini-
mum of 350 plf (5108 N/m).
2. The bracing of the first story shall be located at
each end and at least every 25 feet (7620 mm) o.c.
but not less than 45 percent of the braced wall line.
3. Hold-down connectors shall be provided at the
ends of braced walls for the first floor to founda-
tion with an allowable capacity of 2,100 pounds
(9341 N).
4. Cripple walls shall not be permitted.
2308.12.3 Braced wall line spacing. Spacing between inte-
rior and exterior braced wall lines shall not exceed 25 feet
(7620 mm).
2308.12.4 Braced wall line sheathing. Braced wall lines
shall be braced by one of the types of sheathing prescribed by
Table 2308.12.4 as shown in Figure 2308.9.3. The sum of
lengths of braced wall panels at each braced wall line shall
conform to Table 2308.12.4. Braced wall panels shall be dis-
tributed along the length of the braced wall line and start at
not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) from each end of the braced
wall line. Panel sheathing joints shall occur over studs or
blocking. Sheathing shall be fastened to studs, top and bot-
tom plates and at panel edges occurring over blocking. Wall
framing to which sheathing used for bracing is applied shall
be nominal 2 inch wide [actual 11/2 inch (38 mm)] or larger
members.
Cripple walls having a stud height exceeding 14 inches
(356 mm) shall be considered a story for the purpose of this
section and shall be braced as required for braced wall lines
in accordance with Table 2308.12.4. Where interior braced

WOOD

wall lines occur without a continuous foundation below, the
length of parallel exterior cripple wall bracing shall be one
and one-half times the lengths required by Table 2308.12.4.
Where the cripple wall sheathing type used is Type S-W and
this additional length of bracing cannot be provided, the
capacity of Type S-W sheathing shall be increased by reduc-
ing the spacing of fasteners along the perimeter of each
piece of sheathing to 4 inches (102 mm) o.c.
2308.12.5 Attachment of sheathing. Fastening of braced
wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that prescribed in
Table 2308.12.4 or 2304.9.1. Wall sheathing shall not be
attached to framing members by adhesives.
2308.12.6 Irregular structures. Conventional light-frame
construction shall not be used in irregular portions of struc-
tures in Seismic Design Category D or E. Such irregular por-
tions of structures shall be designed to resist the forces
specified in Chapter 16 to the extent such irregular features
affect the performance of the conventional framing system.
A portion of a structure shall be considered to be irregular
where one or more of the conditions described in Items 1
through 6 below are present.
1. Where exterior braced wall panels are not in one plane
vertically from the foundation to the uppermost story
in which they are required, the structure shall be con-
sidered to be irregular [see Figure 2308.12.6(1)].
Exception: Floors with cantilevers or setbacks not
exceeding four times the nominal depth of the
floor joists [see Figure 2308.12.6(2)] are permitted
to support braced wall panels provided:
1. Floor joists are 2 inches by 10 inches (51 mm
by 254 mm) or larger and spaced not more
than 16 inches (406 mm) o.c.
2. The ratio of the back span to the cantilever is
at least 2:1.
3. Floor joists at ends of braced wall panels are
doubled.
4. A continuous rim joist is connected to the
ends of cantilevered joists. The rim joist is

TABLE 2308.12.4
WALL BRACING IN SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORIES D AND E
(Minimum Length of Wall Bracing per each 25 Linear Feet of Braced Wall Linea)

CONDITION

SHEATHING TYPEb

SDS < 0.50

0.50 £ SDS < 0.75

0.75 £ SDS£ 1.00

SDS > 1.00

One story

G-Pc

S-W

10 feet 8 inches

14 feet 8 inches

18 feet 8 inches

25 feet 0 inches

5 feet 4 inches

8 feet 0 inches

9 feet 4 inches

12 feet 0 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Minimum length of panel bracing of one face of the wall for S-W sheathing or both faces of the wall for G-P sheathing; h/w ratio shall not exceed 2:1. For S-W
panel bracing of the same material on two faces of the wall, the minimum length is permitted to be one-half the tabulated value but the h/w ratio shall not exceed 2:1
and design for uplift is required.
b. G-P = gypsum board, fiberboard, particleboard, lath and plaster or gypsum sheathing boards; S-W = wood structural panels and diagonal wood sheathing.
c. Nailing as specified below shall occur at all panel edges at studs, at top and bottom plates and, where occurring, at blocking:
For 1/2-inch gypsum board, 5d (0.113 inch diameter) cooler nails at 7 inches on center;
For 5/8-inch gypsum board, No. 11 gage (0.120 inch diameter) at 7 inches on center;
For gypsum sheathing board, 13/4 inches long by 7/16-inch head, diamond point galvanized nails at 4 inches on center;
For gypsum lath, No. 13 gage (0.092 inch) by 11/8 inches long, 19/64-inch head, plasterboard at 5 inches on center;
For Portland cement plaster, No. 11 gage (0.120 inch) by 11/2 inches long, 7/16- inch head at 6 inches on center;
For fiberboard and particleboard, No. 11 gage (0.120 inch) by 11/2 inches long, 7/16-inch head, galvanized nails at 3 inches on center.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

515

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:14 AM

65

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

permitted to be spliced using a metal tie not
less than 0.058 inch (1.47 mm) (16 galva-
nized gage) and 11/2 inches (38 mm) wide
fastened with six 16d common nails on each
side. The metal tie shall have a minimum
yield of 33,000 psi (227 MPa).
5. Joists at setbacks or the end of cantilevered
joists shall not carry gravity loads from more
than a single story having uniform wall and
roof loads, nor carry the reactions from
headers having a span of 8 feet (2438 mm) or
more.
2. Where a section of floor or roof is not laterally sup-
ported by braced wall lines on all edges, the structure
shall be considered to be irregular [see Figure
2308.12.6(3)].
Exception: Portions of roofs or floors that do not
support braced wall panels above are permitted to
extend up to 6 feet (1829 mm) beyond a braced
wall line [see Figure 2308.12.6(4)].
3. Where the end of a required braced wall panel extends
more than 1 foot (305 mm) over an opening in the wall
below, the structure shall be considered to be irregu-
lar. This requirement is applicable to braced wall pan-
els offset in plane and to braced wall panels offset out
of plane as permitted by the exception to Item 1 above
in this section [see Figure 2308.12.6(5)].
Exception: Braced wall panels are permitted to
extend over an opening not more than 8 feet (2438
mm) in width where the header is a 4-inch by
12-inch (102 mm by 305 mm) or larger member.
4. Where portions of a floor level are vertically offset
such that the framing members on either side of the
offse t canno t be lapped or tied toge ther in an
approved manner, the structure shall be considered to
be irregular [see Figure 2308.12.6(6)].
Exception: Framing supported directly by foun-
dations need not be lapped or tied directly together.

5. Where braced wall lines are not perpendicular to each
other, the structure shall be considered to be irregular
[see Figure 2308.12.6(7)].
6. Where openings in floor and roof diaphragms having
a maximum dimension greater than 50 percent of the
distance between lines of bracing or an area greater
than 25 percent of the area between orthogonal pairs
of braced wall lines are present, the structure shall be
considered to be irregular [see Figure 2308.12.6(8)].
2308.12.7 Anchorage of exterior means of egress compo-
nents. Exterior egress balconies, exterior exit stairways and
similar means of egress components shall be positively
anchored to the primary structure at not over 8 feet (2438
mm) o.c. or shall be designed for lateral forces. Such attach-
ment shall not be accomplished by use of toenails or nails
subject to withdrawal.
2308.12.8 Sill plate anchorage. Sill plates shall be
anchored with anchor bolts with steel plate washers
between the foundation sill plate and the nut, or approved
anchor straps load rated in accordance with Section 1716.1.
Such washers shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches
by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. The hole
in the plate washer is permitted to be diagonally slotted with
a width of up to 3/16 inch (4.76 mm) larger than the bolt diam-
eter and a slot length not to exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm), pro-
vided a standard cut washer is placed between the plate
washer and the nut.
2308.12.9 Sill plate anchorage in Seismic Design Cate-
gory E. Steel bolts with a minimum nominal diameter of 5/8
inch (15.9 mm) or approved foundation anchor straps load
rated in accordance with Section 1716.1 and spaced to pro-
vide equivalent anchorage shall be used in Seismic Design
Category E.

FIGURE 2308.12.6(1)
BRACED WALL PANELS OUT OF PLANE

516

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:15 AM

66

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.12.6(2)
BRACED WALL PANELS SUPPORTED BY CANTILEVER OR SET BACK

FIGURE 2308.12.6(3)
FLOOR OR ROOF NOT SUPPORTED ON ALL EDGES

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.12.6(4)
ROOF OR FLOOR EXTENSION BEYOND BRACED WALL LINE

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

517

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:20 AM

67

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2308.12.6(5)
BRACED WALL PANEL EXTENSION OVER OPENING

FIGURE 2308.12.6(6)
PORTIONS OF FLOOR LEVEL OFFSET VERTICALLY

FIGURE 2308.12.6(7)
BRACED WALL LINES NOT PERPENDICULAR

518

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:25 AM

68

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

WOOD

FIGURE 2308.12.6(8)
OPENING LIMITATIONS FOR FLOOR AND ROOF DIAPHRAGMS

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

519

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:27 AM

69

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

520

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

23_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:19)_ibc_2009.vp
Friday, February 20, 2009 9:09:27 AM

70

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 24

GLASS AND GLAZING

SECTION 2401
GENERAL

2401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
materials, design, construction and quality of glass, light-
transmitting ceramic and light-transmitting plastic panels for
exterior and interior use in both vertical and sloped applica-
tions in buildings and structures.
2401.2 Glazing replacement. The installation of replacement
glass shall be as required for new installations.

SECTION 2402
DEFINITIONS

2402.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
DALLE GLASS. A decorative composite glazing material
made of individual pieces of glass that are embedded in a cast
matrix of concrete or epoxy.
DECORATIVE GLASS. A carved, leaded or Dalle glass or
glazing material whose purpose is decorative or artistic, not
functional; whose coloring, texture or other design qualities or
components cannot be removed without destroying the glazing
material and whose surface, or assembly into which it is incor-
porated, is divided into segments.

SECTION 2403
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR GLASS

2403.1 Identification. Each pane shall bear the manufacturer’s
mark designating the type and thickness of the glass or glazing
material. The identification shall not be omitted unless
approved and an affidavit is furnished by the glazing contractor
certifying that each light is glazed in accordance with approved
construction documents that comply with the provisions of this
chapter. Safety glazing shall be identified in accordance with
Section 2406.2.
Each pane of tempered glass, except tempered spandrel
glass, shall be permanently identified by the manufacturer. The
identification mark shall be acid etched, sand blasted, ceramic
fired, laser etched, embossed or of a type that, once applied,
cannot be removed without being destroyed.
Tempered spandrel glass shall be provided with a removable
paper marking by the manufacturer.
2403.2 Glass supports. Where one or more sides of any pane
of glass are not firmly supported, or are subjected to unusual
load conditions, detailed construction documents, detailed
shop drawings and analysis or test data assuring safe perfor-
mance for the specific installation shall be prepared by a regis-
tered design professional.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

2403.3 Framing. To be considered firmly supported, the fram-
ing members for each individual pane of glass shall be
designed so the deflection of the edge of the glass perpendicu-
lar to the glass pane shall not exceed 1/175 of the glass edge
length or 3/4 inch (19.1 mm), whichever is less, when subjected
to the larger of the positive or negative load where loads are
combined as specified in Section 1605.
2403.4 Interior glazed areas. Where interior glazing is
installed adjacent to a walking surface, the differential deflec-
tion of two adjacent unsupported edges shall not be greater than
the thickness of the panels when a force of 50 pounds per linear
foot (plf) (730 N/m) is applied horizontally to one panel at any
point up to 42 inches (1067 mm) above the walking surface.
2403.5 Louvered windows or jalousies. Float, wired and pat-
terned glass in louvered windows and jalousies shall be no thin-
ner than nominal 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) and no longer than 48
inches (1219 mm). Exposed glass edges shall be smooth.
Wired glass with wire exposed on longitudinal edges shall
not be used in louvered windows or jalousies.
Where other glass types are used, the design shall be submit-
ted to the building official for approval.

SECTION 2404
WIND, SNOW, SEISMIC
AND DEAD LOADS ON GLASS

2404.1 Vertical glass. Glass sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or
less from vertical in windows, curtain and window walls, doors
and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the
wind loads in Section 1609 for components and cladding.
Glass in glazed curtain walls, glazed storefronts and glazed
partitions shall meet the seismic requirements of ASCE 7, Sec-
tion 13.5.9. The load resistance of glass under uniform load
shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E 1300.
The design of vertical glazing shall be based on the follow-
ing equation:

Fgw £ Fga

(Equation 24-1)

where:
Fgw = Wind load on the glass computed in accordance with
Section 1609.
Fga = Short duration load on the glass as determined in accor-
dance with ASTM E 1300.
2404.2 Sloped glass. Glass sloped more than 15 degrees (0.26
rad) from vertical in skylights, sunrooms, sloped roofs and
other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the most
critical of the following combinations of loads.

Fg = Wo – D

Fg = Wi + D + 0.5 S

(Equation 24-2)

(Equation 24-3)

521

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:12 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GLASS AND GLAZING

(Equation 24-4)

Fg = 0.5 Wi + D + S
where:
D = Glass dead load psf (kN/m2).
For glass sloped 30 degrees (0.52 rad) or less from hori-
zontal,
= 13 tg (For SI: 0.0245 tg).
For glass sloped more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from
horizontal,
= 13 tg cos q (For SI: 0.0245 tg cos q).
Fg = Total load, psf (kN/m2) on glass.
S
= Snow load, psf (kN/m2) as determined in Section 1608.
tg
= Total glass thickness, inches (mm) of glass panes and
plies.
Wi = Inward wind force, psf (kN/m2) as calculated in Section
1609.
Wo = Outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) as calculated in Sec-
tion 1609.
= Angle of slope from horizontal.
Exception: Unit skylights shall be designed in accordance
with Section 2405.5.
The design of sloped glazing shall be based on the following
equation:

q

Fg £ Fga

(Equation 24-5)

where:
Fg = Total load on the glass determined from the load com-
binations above.
Fga = Short duration load resistance of the glass as deter-
mined according to ASTM E 1300 for Equations 24-2
and 24-3; or the long duration load resistance of the
glass as determined according to ASTM E 1300 for
Equation 24-4.
2404.3 Wired, patterned and sandblasted glass.
2404.3.1 Vertical wired glass. Wired glass sloped 15
degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, curtain
and window walls, doors and other exterior applications
shall be designed to resist the wind loads in Section 1609 for
components and cladding according to the following
equation:

(Equation 24-6)

Fgw < 0.5 Fge
where:
Fgw = Is the wind load on the glass computed per Section
1609.
Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E 1300 using a thick-
ness designation for monolithic glass that is not
greater than the thickness of wired glass.
2404.3.2 Sloped wired glass. Wired glass sloped more than
15 degrees (0.26 rad) from vertical in skylights, sunspaces,
sloped roofs and other exterior applications shall be
designed to resist the most critical of the combinations of
loads from Section 2404.2.

522

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:12 AM

2

For Equations 24-2 and 24-3:

Fg < 0.5 Fge

For Equation 24-4:

Fg < 0.3 Fge

(Equation 24-7)

(Equation 24-8)

where:
Fg = Total load on the glass.
Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E 1300.
2404.3.3 Vertical patterned glass. Patterned glass sloped
15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, cur-
tain and window walls, doors and other exterior applications
shall be designed to resist the wind loads in Section 1609 for
components and cladding according to the following
equation:

Fgw < 1.0 Fge

(Equation 24-9)

where:
Fgw = Wind load on the glass computed per Section 1609.
Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E 1300. The value for
patterned glass shall be based on the thinnest part of
the glass. Interpolation between nonfactored load
charts in ASTM E 1300 shall be permitted.
2404.3.4 Sloped patterned glass. Patterned glass sloped
more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from vertical in skylights,
sunspaces, sloped roofs and other exterior applications shall
be designed to resist the most critical of the combinations of
loads from Section 2404.2.
For Equations 24-2 and 24-3:

Fg < 1.0 Fge

For Equation 24-4:

Fg < 0.6Fge

(Equation 24-10)

(Equation 24-11 )

where
Fg = Total load on the glass.
Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E 1300. The value for
patterned glass shall be based on the thinnest part of
the glass. Interpolation between the nonfactored load
charts in ASTM E 1300 shall be permitted.
2404.3.5 Vertical sandblasted glass. Sandblasted glass
sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in win-
dows, curtain and window walls, doors, and other exterior
applications shall be designed to resist the wind loads in
Section 1609 for components and cladding according to the
following equation:

Fg < 0.5 Fge

(Equation 24-12)

where:
Fg = Total load on the glass.
Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E 1300. The value for
sandblasted glass is for moderate levels of sandblast-
ing.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2404.4 Other designs. For designs outside the scope of this
section, an analysis or test data for the specific installation shall
be prepared by a registered design professional.

SECTION 2405
SLOPED GLAZING AND SKYLIGHTS

2405.1 Scope. This section applies to the installation of glass
and other transparent, translucent or opaque glazing material
installed at a slope more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from the
vertical plane, including glazing materials in skylights, roofs
and sloped walls.
2405.2 Allowable glazing materials and limitations. Sloped
glazing shall be any of the following materials, subject to the
listed limitations.
1. For monolithic glazing systems, the glazing material of
the single light or layer shall be laminated glass with a
minimum 30-mil (0.76 mm) polyvinyl butyral (or equiv-
alent) interlayer, wired glass, light-transmitting plastic
materials meeting the requirements of Section 2607,
heat-strengthened glass or fully tempered glass.
2. For multiple-layer glazing systems, each light or layer
shall consist of any of the glazing materials specified in
Item 1 above.
Annealed glass is permitted to be used as specified within
Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 2405.3.
For additional requirements for plastic skylights, see Section
2610. Glass-block construction shall conform to the require-
ments of Section 2101.2.5.
2405.3 Screening. Where used in monolithic glazing systems,
heat-strengthened glass and fully tempered glass shall have
screens installed below the glazing material. The screens and
their fastenings shall: (1) be capable of supporting twice the
weight of the glazing; (2) be firmly and substantially fastened
to the framing members and (3) be installed within 4 inches
(102 mm) of the glass. The screens shall be constructed of a
noncombustible material not thinner than No. 12 B&S gage
(0.0808 inch) with mesh not larger than 1 inch by 1 inch (25
mm by 25 mm). In a corrosive atmosphere, structurally equiva-
lent noncorrosive screen materials shall be used. Heat-
strengthened glass, fully tempered glass and wired glass, when
used in multiple-layer glazing systems as the bottom glass
layer over the walking surface, shall be equipped with screen-
ing that conforms to the requirements for monolithic glazing
systems.
Exception: In monolithic and multiple-layer sloped glazing
systems, the following applies:
1. Fully tempered glass installed without protective
screens where glazed between intervening floors at a
slope of 30 degrees (0.52 rad) or less from the vertical
plane shall have the highest point of the glass 10 feet
(3048 mm) or less above the walking surface.
2. Screens are not required below any glazing material,
including annealed glass, where the walking surface
below the glazing material is permanently protected
from the risk of falling glass or the area below the
glazing material is not a walking surface.

GLASS AND GLAZING

3. Any glazing material, including annealed glass, is
permitted to be installed without screens in the sloped
g l a z i n g s y s t em s o f c omm e r c i a l o r d e t a c h e d
noncombustible greenhouses used exclusively for
growing plants and not open to the public, provided
that the height of the greenhouse at the ridge does not
exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) above grade.
4. Screens shall not be required within individual dwell-
ing units in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 where fully tem-
pered glass is used as single glazing or as both panes
in an insulating glass unit, and the following condi-
tions are met:
4.1. Each pane of the glass is 16 square feet (1.5
m2) or less in area.
4.2. The highest point of the glass is 12 feet (3658
mm) or less above any walking surface or
other accessible area.
4.3. The glass thickness is 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) or
less.
5. Screens shall not be required for laminated glass with
a 15-mil (0.38 mm) polyvinyl butyral (or equivalent)
interlayer used within individual dwelling units in
Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 within the following limits:
5.1. Each pane of glass is 16 square feet (1.5 m2) or
less in area.
5.2. The highest point of the glass is 12 feet (3658
mm) or less above a walking surface or other
accessible area.
2405.4 Framing. In Type I and II construction, sloped glazing
and skylight frames shall be constructed of noncombustible
materials. In structures where acid fumes deleterious to metal
are incidental to the use of the buildings, approved pres-
sure-treated wood or other approved noncorrosive materials
are permitted to be used for sash and frames. Framing support-
ing sloped glazing and skylights shall be designed to resist the
tributary roof loads in Chapter 16. Skylights set at an angle of
less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the horizontal plane shall
be mounted at least 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the
roof on a curb constructed as required for the frame. Skylights
shall not be installed in the plane of the roof where the roof
pitch is less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the horizontal.

Exception: Installation of a skylight without a curb shall be
permitted on roofs with a minimum slope of 14 degrees
(three units vertical in 12 units horizontal) in Group R-3
occupancies. All unit skylights installed in a roof with a
pitch flatter than 14 degrees (0.25 rad) shall be mounted at
least 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the roof on a curb
constructed as required for the frame unless otherwise spec-
ified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2405.5 Unit skylights. Unit skylights shall be tested and
lab e led a s comp ly ing w i th AAMA /WDMA /CSA 101 /
I.S.2/A440. The label shall state the name of the manufacturer,
the approved labeling agency, the product designation and the
performance grade rating as specified in AAMA/WDMA/CSA
101/I.S.2/A440. If the product manufacturer has chosen to
have the performance grade of the skylight rated separately for

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

523

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:12 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GLASS AND GLAZING

positive and negative design pressure, then the label shall state
b o t h p e r f o r m a n c e g r a d e r a t i n g s a s s p e c i f i e d i n
AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 and the skylight shall
comply with Section 2405.5.2. If the skylight is not rated sepa-
rately for positive and negative pressure, then the performance
grade rating shown on the label shall be the performance grade
rating determined in accordance with AAMA/WDMA/CSA
101/I.S.2/A440 for both positive and negative design pressure
and the skylight shall conform to Section 2405.5.1.
2405.5.1 Unit skylights rated for the same performance
grade for both positive and negative design pressure.
The design of unit skylights shall be based on the following
equation:

(Equation 24-13)

Fg £ PG
where:
Fg

PG

= Maximum load on the skylight determined
from Equations 24-2 through 24-4 in Section
2404.2.
= Performance grade rating of the skylight.
2405.5.2 Unit skylights rated for separate performance
grades for positive and negative design pressure. The
design of unit skylights rated for performance grade for both
positive and negative design pressures shall be based on the
following equations:

Fgi £ PGPos

Fgo £ PGNeg

(Equation 24-14)

(Equation 24-15)

where:
PGPos = Performance grade rating of the skylight under
positive design pressure;
PGNeg = Performance grade rating of the skylight under
negative design pressure; and
Fgi and Fgo are determined in accordance with the following:
For Wo ³ D,
where:
Wo

= Outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) as calculated in
Section 1609.
= The dead weight of the glazing, psf (kN/m2) as
determined in Section 2404.2 for glass, or by the
weight of the plastic, psf (kN/m2) for plastic glaz-
ing.

D

Fgi

Fgo

= Maximum load on the skylight determined from
Equations 24-3 and 24-4 in Section 2404.2.
= Maximum load on the skylight determined from
Equation 24-2.
For Wo < D,
where:
Wo

= Is the outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) as calcu-
lated in Section 1609.
= The dead weight of the glazing, psf (kN/m2) as
determined in Section 2404.2 for glass, or by the
weight of the plastic for plastic glazing.
= Maximum load on the skylight determined from
Equations 24-2 through 24-4 in Section 2404.2.
= 0.

D

Fgi

Fgo

SECTION 2406
SAFETY GLAZING

2406.1 Human impact loads. Individual glazed areas, includ-
ing glass mirrors, in hazardous locations as defined in Section
2406.4 shall comply with Sections 2406.1.1 through 2406.1.4.
2406.1.1 Impact test. Except as provided in Sections
2406.1.2 through 2406.1.4, all glazing shall pass the impact
test requirements of Section 2406.2.
2406.1.2 Plastic glazing. Plastic glazing shall meet the
weathering requirements of ANSI Z97.1.
2406.1.3 Glass block. Glass-block walls shall comply with
Section 2101.2.5.
2406.1.4 Louvered windows and jalousies. Louvered
windows and jalousies shall comply with Section 2403.5.
2406.2 Impact test. Where required by other sections of this
code, glazing shall be tested in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR
1201. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Category I
or II as indicated in Table 2406.2(1).
Exception: Glazing not in doors or enclosures for hot tubs,
whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs and showers
shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with ANSI
Z97.1. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Class
A or B as indicated in Table 2406.2(2).
2406.3 Identification of safety glazing. Except as indicated in
Section 2406.3.1, each pane of safety glazing installed in haz-

EXPOSED SURFACE
AREA OF ONE SIDE
OF ONE LITE

9 square feet or less

TABLE 2406.2(1)
MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING CPSC 16 CFR 1201

GLAZING IN
STORM OR
COMBINATION
DOORS
(Category class)

GLAZING IN
DOORS
(Category class)

GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
ITEM 7 OF
SECTION 2406.4
(Category class)

GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
ITEM 6 OF
SECTION 2406.4
(Category class)

DOORS AND
ENCLOSURES
REGULATED BY ITEM
5 OF SECTION 2406.4
(Category class)

SLIDING GLASS
DOORS PATIO TYPE
(Category class)

More than 9 square feet

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

524

I

II

I

II

No requirement

II

I

II

II

II

II

II

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:13 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GLASS AND GLAZING

TABLE 2406.2(2)
MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING ANSI Z97.1

EXPOSED SURFACE AREA OF
ONE SIDE OF ONE LITE

GLAZED PANELS REGULATED
BY ITEM 7 OF SECTION 2406.4
(Category class)

GLAZED PANELS REGULATED
BY ITEM 6 OF SECTION 2406.4
(Category class)

DOORS AND ENCLOSURES REGULATED
BY ITEM 5 OF SECTION 2406.4a
(Category class)

9 square feet or less

No requirement

More than 9 square feet

A

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. Use is only permitted by the exception to Section 2406.2.

ardous locations shall be identified by a manufacturer’s desig-
n a t i o n s p e c i f y i n g w h o a p p l i e d t h e d e s i g n a t i o n ,
t h e
manufacturer or installer and the safety glazing standard with
which it complies, as well as the information specified in Sec-
tion 2403.1. The designation shall be acid etched, sand blasted,
ceramic fired, laser etched, embossed or of a type that once
applied, cannot be removed without being destroyed. A label as
defined in Section 202.1 and meeting the requirements of this
section shall be permitted in lieu of the manufacturer’s designa-
tion.
Exceptions:
1. For other than tempered glass, manufacturer’s designa-
tions are not required, provided the building official
approves the use of a certificate, affidavit or other evi-
dence confirming compliance with this code.
2. Tempered spandrel glass is permitted to be identified by
the manufacturer with a removable paper designation
2406.3.1 Multi-pane assemblies. Multi-pane glazed
assemblies having individual panes not exceeding 1 square
foot (0.09 m2) in exposed areas shall have at least one pane
in the assembly marked as indicated in Section 2406.3.
Other panes in the assembly shall be marked “CPSC 16
CFR 1201” or “ANSI Z97.1,” as appropriate.
2406.4 Hazardous locations. The following shall be consid-
ered specific hazardous locations requiring safety glazing
materials:
1. Glazing in swinging doors except jalousies (see Sec-
tion 2406.4.1).
2. Glazing in fixed and sliding panels of sliding door
assemblies and panels in sliding and bifold closet door
assemblies.
3. Glazing in storm doors.
4. Glazing in unframed swinging doors.
5. Glazing in doors and enclosures for hot tubs, whirl-
pools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs and showers.
Glazing in any portion of a building wall enclosing
these compartments where the bottom exposed edge of
the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above a
standing surface.
6. Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel adja-
cent to a door where the nearest exposed edge of the
glazing is within a 24-inch (610 mm) arc of either verti-
cal edge of the door in a closed position and where the
bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60
inches (1524 mm) above the walking surface.

B

A

A

A

Exceptions:
1. Panels where there is an intervening wall or
other permanent barrier between the door and
glazing.
2. Where access through the door is to a closet or
storage area 3 feet (914 mm) or less in depth.
Glazing in this application shall comply with
Section 2406.4, Item 7.
3. Glazing in walls perpendicular to the plane of
the door in a closed position, other than the
wall towards which the door swings when
opened, in one- and two-family dwellings or
within dwelling units in Group R-2.
7. Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel, other
than in those locations described in preceding Items 5
and 6, which meets all of the following conditions:
7.1. Exposed area of an individual pane greater than 9
square feet (0.84 m2);
7.2. Exposed bottom edge less than 18 inches (457
mm) above the floor;
7.3. Exposed top edge greater than 36 inches (914
mm) above the floor; and
7.4. One or more walking surface(s) within 36 inches
(914 mm) horizontally of the plane of the glaz-
ing.
Exception: Safety glazing for Item 7 is not
required for the following installations:
1. A protective bar 11/2 inches (38 mm) or
more in height, capable of withstanding a
horizontal load of 50 pounds plf (730
N/m) without contacting the glass, is
installed on the accessible sides of the
glazing 34 inches to 38 inches (864 mm
to 965 mm) above the floor.
2. The outboard pane in insulating glass
units or multiple glazing where the bot-
tom exposed edge of the glass is 25 feet
(7620 mm) or more above any grade,
roof, walking surface or other horizontal
or sloped (within 45 degrees of horizon-
tal) (0.78 rad) surface adjacent to the
glass exterior.
8. Glazing in guards and railings, including structural
baluster panels and nonstructural in-fill panels, regard-
less of area or height above a walking surface.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

525

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:13 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GLASS AND GLAZING

9. Glazing in walls and fences enclosing indoor and out-
door swimming pools, hot tubs and spas where all of
the following conditions are present:
9.1. The bottom edge of the glazing on the pool or spa
side is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above a
walking surface on the pool or spa side of the
glazing; and
9.2. The glazing is within 60 inches (1524 mm) hori-
zontally of the water’s edge of a swimming pool
or spa.
10. Glazing adjacent to stairways, landings and ramps
within 36 inches (914 mm) horizontally of a walking
surface; when the exposed surface of the glass is less
than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the plane of the adja-
cent walking surface.
11. Glazing adjacent to stairways within 60 inches (1524
mm) horizontally of the bottom tread of a stairway in
any direction when the exposed surface of the glass is
less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the nose of the
tread.
Exception: Safety glazing for Item 10 or 11 is not
required for the following installations where:
1. The side of a stairway, landing or ramp which
has a guard or handrail, including balusters or
in-fill panels, complying with the provisions of
Sections 1013 and 1607.7; and
2. The plane of the glass is greater than 18 inches
(457 mm) from the railing.
2406.4.1 Exceptions. The following products, materials
and uses shall not be considered specific hazardous loca-
tions:
1. Openings in doors through which a 3-inch (76 mm)
sphere is unable to pass.
2. Decorative glass in Section 2406.4, Item 1, 6 or 7.
3. Glazing materials used as curved glazed panels in
revolving doors.
4. Commercial refrigerated cabinet glazed doors.
5. Glass-block panels complying with Section 2101.2.5.
6. Louvered windows and jalousies complying with the
requirements of Section 2403.5.
7. Mirrors and other glass panels mounted or hung on a
surface that provides a continuous backing support.
2406.5 Fire department access panels. Fire department glass
access panels shall be of tempered glass. For insulating glass
units, all panes shall be tempered glass.

SECTION 2407
GLASS IN HANDRAILS AND GUARDS

2407.1 Materials. Glass used as a handrail assembly or a
guard section shall be constructed of either single fully tem-
pered glass, laminated fully tempered glass or laminated heat-
strengthened glass. Glazing in railing in-fill panels shall be of
an approved safety glazing material that conforms to the provi-

sions of Section 2406.1.1. For all glazing types, the minimum
nominal thickness shall be 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Fully tempered
glass and laminated glass shall comply with Category II of
CPSC 16 CFR 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1, listed in Chap-
ter 35.
2407.1.1 Loads. The panels and their support system shall
be designed to withstand the loads specified in Section
1607.7. A safety factor of four shall be used.
2407.1.2 Support. Each handrail or guard section shall be
supported by a minimum of three glass balusters or shall be
otherwise supported to remain in place should one baluster
panel fail. Glass balusters shall not be installed without an
attached handrail or guard.
Exception: A top rail shall not be required where the
glass balusters are laminated glass with two or more
glass plies of equal thickness and the same glass type
when approved by the building official. The panels shall
be designed to withstand the loads specified in Section
1607.7.
2407.1.3 Parking garages. Glazing materials shall not be
installed in handrails or guards in parking garages except
for pedestrian areas not exposed to impact from vehicles.
2407.1.4 Glazing in wind-borne debris regions. Glazing
installed in in-fill panels or balusters in wind-borne debris
regions shall comply with the following:
2407.1.4.1 Ballusters and in-fill panels. Glass installed
in exterior railing in-fill panels or balusters shall be lami-
nated glass complying with Category II of CPSC 16 CFR
1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1.
2407.1.4.2 Glass supporting top rail. When the top rail
is supported by glass, the assembly shall be tested
acco rd ing to the impac t requ i remen ts o f Sec t ion
1609.1.2. The top rail shall remain in place after impact.

SECTION 2408
GLAZING IN ATHLETIC FACILITIES

2408.1 General. Glazing in athletic facilities and similar uses
subject to impact loads, which forms whole or partial wall sec-
tions or which is used as a door or part of a door, shall comply
with this section.
2408.2 Racquetball and squash courts.
2408.2.1 Testing. Test methods and loads for individual
glazed areas in racquetball and squash courts subject to
impact loads shall conform to those of CPSC 16 CFR or
ANSI Z97.1, listed in Chapter 35, with impacts being
applied at a height of 59 inches (1499 mm) above the play-
ing surface to an actual or simulated glass wall installation
with fixtures, fittings and methods of assembly identical to
those used in practice.
Glass walls shall comply with the following conditions:
1. A glass wall in a racquetball or squash court, or simi-
lar use subject to impact loads, shall remain intact fol-
lowing a test impact.

526

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:13 AM

6

GLASS AND GLAZING

2409.3 Glass in elevator cars.
2409.3.1 Glass types. Glass in elevator car enclosures,
glass elevator car doors and glass used for lining walls and
ceilings of elevator cars shall be laminated glass conforming
to Class A in accordance with ANSI Z97.1 or Category II in
accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.
Exception: Tempered glass shall be permitted to be used
for lining walls and ceilings of elevator cars provided:
1. The glass is bonded to a nonpolymeric coating,
sheeting or film backing having a physical integ-
rity to hold the fragments when the glass breaks.
2. The glass is not subjected to further treatment such
as sandblasting; etching; heat treatment or painting
that could alter the original properties of the glass.
3. The glass is tested to the acceptance criteria for
laminated glass as specified for Class A in accor-
dance with ANSI Z97.l or Category II in accor-
dance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.
2409.3.2 Surface area. The glass in glass elevator car doors
shall be not less than 60 percent of the total visible door
panel surface area as seen from the car side of the doors.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2. The deflection of such walls shall not be greater than
11/2 inches (38 mm) at the point of impact for a drop
height of 48 inches (1219 mm).
Glass doors shall comply with the following conditions:
1. Glass doors shall remain intact following a test impact
at the prescribed height in the center of the door.
2. The relative deflection between the edge of a glass
door and the adjacent wall shall not exceed the thick-
ness of the wall plus 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) for a drop
height of 48 inches (1219 mm).
2408.3 Gymnasiums and basketball courts. Glazing in mul-
tipurpose gymnasiums, basketball courts and similar athletic
facilities subject to human impact loads shall comply with Cat-
egory II of CPSC 16 CFR 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1,
listed in Chapter 35.

SECTION 2409
GLASS IN ELEVATOR HOISTWAYS
AND ELEVATOR CARS
2409.1 Glass in elevator hoistway enclosures. Glass in eleva-
tor hoistway enclosures and hoistway doors shall be laminated
glass conforming to ANSI Z97.1 or CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.
2409.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated hoistways. Glass installed
in hoistways and hoistway doors where the hoistway is
required to have a fire-resistance rating shall also comply
with Section 715.
2409.1.2 Glass hoistway doors. The glass in glass
hoistway doors shall be not less than 60 percent of the total
visible door panel surface area as seen from the landing side.
2409.2 Glass visions panels. Glass in vision panels in elevator
hoistway doors shall be permitted to be any transparent glazing
material not less than 1/4 inches (0.64 mm) in thickness con-
forming to Class A in accordance with ANSI Z97.1 or Cate-
gory II in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201. The area
of any single vision panel shall not be less than 24 square
inches (15 484 mm2) and the total area of one or more vision
panels in any hoistway door shall be not more than 85 square
inches (54 839 mm2).

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

527

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:14 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

528

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

24_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:20)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:14 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 25

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

SECTION 2501
GENERAL

2501.1 Scope.
2501.1.1 General. Provisions of this chapter shall govern
the materials, design, construction and quality of gypsum
board, lath, gypsum plaster and cement plaster.
2501.1.2 Performance. Lathing, plastering and gypsum
board construction shall be done in the manner and with the
materials specified in this chapter, and when required for
fire protection, shall also comply with the provisions of
Chapter 7.
2501.1.3 Other materials. Other approved wall or ceiling
coverings shall be permitted to be installed in accordance
with the recommendations of the manufacturer and the con-
ditions of approval.

SECTION 2502
DEFINITIONS

2502.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
CEMENT PLASTER. A mixture of portland or blended
cement, portland cement or blended cement and hydrated lime,
masonry cement or plastic cement and aggregate and other
approved materials as specified in this code.
EXTERIOR SURFACES. Weather-exposed surfaces.
GYPSUM BOARD. Gypsum wallboard, gypsum sheathing,
gypsum base for gypsum veneer plaster, exterior gypsum soffit
board, predecorated gypsum board or water-resistant gypsum
backing board complying with the standards listed in Tables
2506.2, 2507.2 and Chapter 35.
GYPSUM PLASTER. A mixture of calcined gypsum or cal-
cined gypsum and lime and aggregate and other approved
materials as specified in this code.
GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER. Gypsum plaster applied to
an approved base in one or more coats normally not exceeding
1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in total thickness.
INTERIOR SURFACES. Surfaces other than weather-
exposed surfaces.
WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES. Surfaces of walls,
ceilings, floors, roofs, soffits and similar surfaces exposed to
the weather except the following:
1. Ceilings and roof soffits enclosed by walls, fascia, bulk-
heads or beams that extend a minimum of 12 inches (305
mm) below such ceiling or roof soffits.
2. Walls or portions of walls beneath an unenclosed roof
area, where located a horizontal distance from an open

exterior opening equal to at least twice the height of the
opening.
3. Ceiling and roof soffits located a minimum horizontal
distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) from the outer edges of the
ceiling or roof soffits.
WIRE BACKING. Horizontal strands of tautened wire
attached to surfaces of vertical supports which, when covered
with the building paper, provide a backing for cement plaster.

SECTION 2503
INSPECTION

2503.1 Inspection. Lath and gypsum board shall be inspected
in accordance with Section 109.3.5.

SECTION 2504
VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES

2504.1 Scope. The following requirements shall be met where
construction involves gypsum board, lath and plaster in vertical
and horizontal assemblies.
2504.1.1 Wood framing. Wood supports for lath or gypsum
board, as well as wood stripping or furring, shall not be less
than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal thickness in the least dimen-
sion.

Exception: The minimum nominal dimension of wood
furring strips installed over solid backing shall not be less
than 1 inch by 2 inches (25 mm by 51 mm).
2504.1.2 Studless partitions. The minimum thickness of
vertically erected studless solid plaster partitions of 3/8-inch
(9.5 mm) and 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) rib metal
lath or
1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) long-length gypsum lath and gyp-
sum board partitions shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

SECTION 2505
SHEAR WALL CONSTRUCTION
2505.1 Resistance to shear (wood framing). Wood-framed
shear walls sheathed with gypsum board, lath and plaster shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with Section
2306.7 and are permitted to resist wind and seismic loads.
Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations
in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7.
2505.2 Resistance to shear (steel framing). Cold-formed
steel-framed shear walls sheathed with gypsum board and con-
structed in accordance with the materials and provisions of
Section 2210.6 are permitted to resist wind and seismic loads.
Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations
in Section 12.2.1 of ASCE 7.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

529

25_ibc_2009pg529.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:04:22 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

SECTION 2506
GYPSUM BOARD MATERIALS

2506.1 General. Gypsum board materials and accessories
shall be identified by the manufacturer’s designation to indi-
cate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in
this section and stored to protect such materials from the
weather.

2506.2 Standards. Gypsum board materials shall conform to
the appropriate standards listed in Table 2506.2 and Chapter 35
and, where required for fire protection, shall conform to the
provisions of Chapter 7.

TABLE 2506.2
GYPSUM BOARD MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

MATERIAL

STANDARD

ASTM C 1047

ASTM C 557

ASTM C 920
ASTM C 931
ASTM C 1278
ASTM C 1178
ASTM C 1658
ASTM C 1177

ASTM C 442

Accessories for gypsum board
Adhesives for fastening gypsum
wallboard
Elastomeric joint sealants
Exterior soffit board
Fiber-reinforced gypsum panels
Glass mat gypsum backing panel
Glass mat gypsum panel
Glass mat gypsum substrate
Gypsum backing board and gypsum
shaftliner board
Gypsum ceiling board
Gypsum sheathing
Gypsum wallboard
Joint reinforcing tape and compound

Nails for gypsum boards

ASTM C 1395
ASTM C 79
ASTM C 36
ASTM C 474; C 475
ASTM C 514,
F 547, F 1667
Predecorated gypsum board
ASTM C 960
Steel screws
ASTM C 954; C 1002
Steel studs, load-bearing
ASTM C 955
Steel studs, nonload-bearing
ASTM C 645
Standard specification for gypsum board ASTM C 1396
ASTM C 22; C 472;
C 473
ASTM C 630

Water-resistant gypsum backing board

Testing gypsum and gypsum products

2506.2.1 Other materials. Metal suspension systems for
acoustical and lay-in panel ceilings shall conform with
ASTM C 635 listed in Chapter 35 and Section 13.5.6 of
ASCE 7 for installation in high seismic areas.

SECTION 2507
LATHING AND PLASTERING

2507.1 General. Lathing and plastering materials and accesso-
ries shall be marked by the manufacturer’s designation to indi-
cate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in

this section and stored in such a manner to protect them from
the weather.
2507.2 Standards. Lathing and plastering materials shall con-
form to the standards listed in Table 2507.2 and Chapter 35
and, where required for fire protection, shall also conform to
the provisions of Chapter 7.

TABLE 2507.2
LATH, PLASTERING MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

MATERIAL

STANDARD

Accessories for gypsum veneer base
ASTM C 1047
Blended cement
ASTM C 595
Exterior plaster bonding compounds
ASTM C 932
Gypsum base for veneer plasters
ASTM C 588
Gypsum casting and molding plaster ASTM C 59
Gypsum Keene’s cement
ASTM C 61
Gypsum lath
ASTM C 37
Gypsum plaster
ASTM C 28
Gypsum veneer plaster
ASTM C 587
Interior bonding compounds, gypsum ASTM C 631
Lime plasters
ASTM C 5; C 206
Masonry cement
ASTM C 91
Metal lath
ASTM C 847
Plaster aggregates
Sand
Perlite
Vermiculite
Plastic cement
Portland cement
Steel screws
Steel studs and track
Welded wire lath
Woven wire plaster base

ASTM C 35; C 897
ASTM C 35
ASTM C 35
ASTM C 1328
ASTM C 150
ASTM C 1002; C 954
ASTM C 645; C 955
ASTM C 933
ASTM C 1032

SECTION 2508
GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION

2508.1 General. Gypsum board and gypsum plaster construc-
tion shall be of the materials listed in Tables 2506.2 and 2507.2.
These materials shall be assembled and installed in compliance
with the appropriate standards listed in Tables 2508.1 and
2511.1.1, and Chapter 35.

TABLE 2508.1
INSTALLATION OF GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION

MATERIAL

STANDARD

Gypsum board
Gypsum sheathing
Gypsum veneer base
Interior lathing and furring
Steel framing for gypsum boards

GA-216; ASTM C 840
ASTM C 1280
ASTM C 844
ASTM C 841
ASTM C 754; C 1007

530

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

25_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:51 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

2508.2 Limitations. Gypsum wallboard or gypsum plaster
shall not be used in any exterior surface where such gypsum
construction will be exposed directly to the weather. Gypsum
wallboard shall not be used where there will be direct exposure
to water or continuous high humidity conditions. Gypsum
sheathing shall be installed on exterior surfaces in accordance
with ASTM C 1280.
2508.2.1 Weather protection. Gypsum wallboard, gypsum
lath or gypsum plaster shall not be installed until weather
protection for the installation is provided.
2508.3 Single-ply application. Edges and ends of gypsum
board shall occur on the framing members, except those edges
and ends that are perpendicular to the framing members. Edges
and ends of gypsum board shall be in moderate contact except
in concealed spaces where fire-resistance-rated construction,
shear resistance or diaphragm action is not required.
2508.3.1 Floating angles. Fasteners at the top and bottom
plates of vertical assemblies, or the edges and ends of hori-
zontal assemblies perpendicular to supports, and at the wall
line are permitted to be omitted except on shear resisting
elements or fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Fasteners shall
be applied in such a manner as not to fracture the face paper
with the fastener head.
2508.4 Joint treatment. Gypsum board fire-resistance-rated
assemblies shall have joints and fasteners treated.
Exception: Joint and fastener treatment need not be pro-
vided where any of the following conditions occur:
1. Where the gypsum board is to receive a decorative
finish such as wood paneling, battens, acoustical fin-
ishes or any similar application that would be equiva-
lent to joint treatment.
2. On single-layer systems where joints occur over
wood framing members.
3. Square edge or tongue-and-groove edge gypsum
board (V-edge), gypsum backing board or gypsum
sheathing.
4. On multilayer systems where the joints of adjacent
layers are offset from one to another.
5. Assemblies tested without joint treatment.

2508.5 Horizontal gypsum board diaphragm ceilings. Gyp-
sum board shall be permitted to be used on wood joists to create
a horizontal diaphragm ceiling in accordance with Table
2508.5.
2508.5.1 Diaphragm proportions. The maximum allow-
able diaphragm proportions shall be 11/2:1 between shear
resisting elements. Rotation or cantilever conditions shall
not be permitted.
2508.5.2 Installation. Gypsum board used in a horizontal
diaphragm ceiling shall be installed perpendicular to ceiling
framing members. End joints of adjacent courses of gypsum
board shall not occur on the same joist.
2508.5.3 Blocking of perimeter edges. All perimeter edges
shall be blocked using a wood member not less than 2-inch
by 6-inch (51 mm by 159 mm) nominal dimension. Block-
ing material shall be installed flat over the top plate of the
wall to provide a nailing surface not less than 2 inches (51
mm) in width for the attachment of the gypsum board.
2508.5.4 Fasteners. Fasteners used for the attachment of
gypsum board to a horizontal diaphragm ceiling shall be as
defined in Table 2508.5. Fasteners shall be spaced not more
than 7 inches (178 mm) on center (o.c.) at all supports,
including perimeter blocking, and not more than 3/8 inch
(9.5 mm) from the edges and ends of the gypsum board.
2508.5.5 Lateral force restrictions. Gypsum board shall
not be used in diaphragm ceilings to resist lateral forces
imposed by masonry or concrete construction.

SECTION 2509
GYPSUM BOARD IN SHOWERS
AND WATER CLOSETS

2509.1 Wet areas. Showers and public toilet walls shall con-
form to Sections 1210.2 and 1210.3.
2509.2 Base for tile. Glass mat water-resistant gypsum back-
ing panels, discrete nonasbestos fiber-cement interior substrate
sheets or nonasbestos fiber-mat reinforced cement substrate
sheets in compliance with ASTM C 1178, C 1288 or C 1325
and installed in accordance with manufacturer recommenda-
tions shall be used as a base for wall tile in tub and shower areas

TABLE 2508.5
SHEAR CAPACITY FOR HORIZONTAL WOOD FRAMED GYPSUM BOARD DIAPHRAGM CEILING ASSEMBLIES

MATERIAL

THICKNESS OF MATERIAL
(MINIMUM) (inches)

SPACING OF FRAMING MEMBERS
(MAXIMUM) (inches)

SHEAR VALUEa, b
(plf of ceiling)

Gypsum board

Gypsum board

1/2

1/2

16 o.c.

24 o.c.

90

70

MIMIMUM FASTENER SIZE

5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64 -inch headc
5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64 -inch headc

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.59 N/m.
a. Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term loading due to wind or seismic loading.Values shall be reduced 25 percent
for normal loading.
b. Values shall be reduced 50 percent in Seismic Design Categories D, E and F.
c. 11/4-inch, No. 6 Type S or W screws are permitted to be substituted for the listed nails.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

531

25_ibc_2009pg531.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:03:22 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

and wall and ceiling panels in shower areas. Water-resistant
gypsum backing board shall be used as a base for tile in water
closet compartment walls when installed in accordance with
GA-216 or ASTM C 840 and manufacturer recommendations.
Regular gypsum wallboard is permitted under tile or wall pan-
els in other wall and ceiling areas when installed in accordance
with GA-216 or ASTM C 840.
2509.3 Limitations. Water-resistant gypsum backing board
shall not be used in the following locations:
1. Over a vapor retarder in shower or bathtub compart-
ments.
2. Where there will be direct exposure to water or in areas
subject to continuous high humidity.
3. On ceilings where frame spacing exceeds 12 inches (305
mm) o.c. for 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) water-resistant
gypsum backing board and more than 16 inches (406
mm) o.c. for 5/8-inch-thick (15.9 mm) water-resistant
gypsum backing board.

SECTION 2510
LATHING AND FURRING FOR
CEMENT PLASTER (STUCCO)

2510.1 General. Exterior and interior cement plaster and lath-
ing shall be done with the appropriate materials listed in Table
2507.2 and Chapter 35.
2510.2 Weather protection. Materials shall be stored in such a
manner as to protect such materials from the weather.
2510.3 Installation. Installation of these materials shall be in
compliance with ASTM C 926 and ASTM C 1063.
2510.4 Corrosion resistance. Metal lath and lath attachments
shall be of corrosion-resistant material.
2510.5 Backing. Backing or a lath shall provide sufficient
rigidity to permit plaster applications.
2510.5.1 Support of lath. Where lath on vertical surfaces
extends between rafters or other similar projecting mem-
bers, solid backing shall be installed to provide support for
lath and attachments.
2510.5.2 Use of gypsum backing board.
2510.5.2.1 Use of gypsum board as a backing board.
Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard shall not be used as a
backing for cement plaster.
Exception: Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard is per-
mitted, with a water-resistive barrier, as a backing for
self-furred metal lath or self-furred wire fabric lath
and cement plaster where either of the following con-
ditions occur:
1. On horizontal supports of ceilings or roof sof-
fits.
2. On interior walls.
2510.5.2.2 Use of gypsum sheathing backing. Gypsum
sheathing is permitted as a backing for metal or wire fab-
ric lath and cement plaster on walls. A water-resistive

barrier shall be provided in accordance with Section
2510.6.
2510.5.3 Backing not required. Wire backing is not
required under expanded metal lath or paperbacked wire
fabric lath.
2510.6 Water-resistive barriers. Water-resistive barriers
shall be installed as required in Section 1404.2 and, where
a p p l i e d ov e r w o o d - b a s e d s h e a t h i n g , s h a l l
i n c l u d e a
water-resistive vapor-permeable barrier with a performance at
least equivalent to two layers of Grade D paper.
Exception: Where the water-resistive barrier that
is
applied over wood-based sheathing has a water resistance
equal to or greater than that of 60-minute Grade D paper and
is separated from the stucco by an intervening, substantially
nonwater-absorbing layer or drainage space.
2510.7 Preparation of masonry and concrete. Surfaces shall
be clean, free from efflorescence, sufficiently damp and rough
for proper bond. If the surface is insufficiently rough, approved
bonding agents or a portland cement dash bond coat mixed in
proportions of not more than two parts volume of sand to one
part volume of portland cement or plastic cement shall be
applied. The dash bond coat shall be left undisturbed and shall
be moist cured not less than 24 hours.

SECTION 2511
INTERIOR PLASTER

2511.1 General. Plastering gypsum plaster or cement plaster
shall not be less than three coats where applied over metal lath
or wire fabric lath and not less than two coats where applied
over other bases permitted by this chapter.
Exception: Gypsum veneer plaster and cement plaster spe-
cifically designed and approved for one-coat applications.
2511.1.1 Installation. Installation of lathing and plaster
materials shall conform with Table 2511.1.1 and Section
2507.

TABLE 2511.1.1
INSTALLATION OF PLASTER CONSTRUCTION

MATERIAL

STANDARD

Cement plaster
Gypsum plaster
Gypsum veneer plaster
Interior lathing and furring
(gypsum plaster)
Lathing and furring (cement plaster)
Steel framing

ASTM C 926
ASTM C 842
ASTM C 843

ASTM C 841

ASTM C 1063
ASTM C 754; C 1007

2511.2 Limitations. Plaster shall not be applied directly to
fiber insulation board. Cement plaster shall not be applied
directly to gypsum lath or gypsum plaster except as specified in
Sections 2510.5.1 and 2510.5.2.
2511.3 Grounds. Where installed, grounds shall ensure the
minimum thickness of plaster as set forth in ASTM C 842 and
ASTM C 926. Plaster thickness shall be measured from the
face of lath and other bases.

532

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

25_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:52 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

2511.4 Interior masonry or concrete. Condition of surfaces
shall be as specified in Section 2510.7. Approved specially pre-
pared gypsum plaster designed for application to concrete sur-
faces or approved acoustical plaster is permitted. The total
thickness of base coat plaster applied to concrete ceilings shall
be as set forth in ASTM C 842 or ASTM C 926. Should ceiling
surfaces require more than the maximum thickness permitted
in ASTM C 842 or ASTM C 926, metal lath or wire fabric lath
shall be installed on such surfaces before plastering.
2511.5 Wet areas. Showers and public toilet walls shall con-
form to Sections 1210.2 and 1210.3. When wood frame walls
and partitions are covered on the interior with cement plaster or
tile of similar material and are subject to water splash, the fram-
ing shall be protected with an approved moisture barrier.

SECTION 2512
EXTERIOR PLASTER

2512.1 General. Plastering with cement plaster shall be not
less than three coats when applied over metal lath or wire fabric
lath or gypsum board backing as specified in Section 2510.5
and shall be not less than two coats when applied over masonry
or concrete. If the plaster surface is to be completely covered by
veneer or other facing material, or is completely concealed by
another wall, plaster application need only be two coats, pro-
vided the total thickness is as set forth in ASTM C 926.
2512.1.1 On-grade floor slab. On wood framed or steel
stud construction with an on-grade concrete floor slab sys-
tem, exterior plaster shall be applied in such a manner as to
cover, but not to extend below, the lath and paper. The appli-
cation of lath, paper and flashing or drip screeds shall com-
ply with ASTM C 1063.
2512.1.2 Weep screeds. A minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm)
(No. 26 galvanized sheet gage), corrosion-resistant weep
screed with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2
inches (89 mm) shall be provided at or below the foundation
plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with ASTM C
926. The weep screed shall be placed a minimum of 4 inches
(102 mm) above the earth or 2 inches (51 mm) above paved
areas and be of a type that will allow trapped water to drain
to the exterior of the building. The water-resistive barrier
shall lap the attachment flange. The exterior lath shall cover
and terminate on the attachment flange of the weep screed.
2512.2 Plasticity agents. Only approved plasticity agents and
approved amounts thereof shall be added to portland cement or
blended cements. When plastic cement or masonry cement is
used, no additional lime or plasticizers shall be added.
Hydrated lime or the equivalent amount of lime putty used as a
plasticizer is permitted to be added to cement plaster or cement
and lime plaster in an amount not to exceed that set forth in
ASTM C 926.
2512.3 Limitations. Gypsum plaster shall not be used on exte-
rior surfaces.
2512.4 Cement plaster. Plaster coats shall be protected from
freezing for a period of not less than 24 hours after set has
occurred. Plaster shall be applied when the ambient tempera-
ture is higher than 40°F (4°C), unless provisions are made to

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

keep cement plaster work above 40°F (4°C) during application
and 48 hours thereafter.
2512.5 Second-coat application. The second coat shall be
brought out to proper thickness, rodded and floated sufficiently
rough to provide adequate bond for the finish coat. The second
coat shall have no variation greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in any
direction under a 5-foot (1524 mm) straight edge.
2512.6 Curing and interval. First and second coats of cement
plaster shall be applied and moist cured as set forth in ASTM C
926 and Table 2512.6.

TABLE 2512.6
CEMENT PLASTERSa

MINIMUM PERIOD MOIST
CURING

MINIMUM INTERVAL
BETWEEN COATS

48 hoursa
48 hours
—

48 hoursb
7 daysc
Note c

COAT

First
Second
Finish

a. The first two coats shall be as required for the first coats of exterior plaster,
except that the moist-curing time period between the first and second coats
shall not be less than 24 hours. Moist curing shall not be required where job
and weather conditions are favorable to the retention of moisture in the
cement plaster for the required time period.
b. Twenty-four-hour minimum interval between coats of interior cement plas-
ter. For alternate method of application, see Section 2512.8.
c. Finish coat plaster is permitted to be applied to interior cement plaster base
coats after a 48-hour period.

2512.7 Application to solid backings. Where applied over
gypsum backing as specified in Section 2510.5 or directly to
unit masonry surfaces, the second coat is permitted to be
applied as soon as the first coat has attained sufficient hardness.
2512.8 Alternate method of application. The second coat is
permitted to be applied as soon as the first coat has attained suf-
ficiently rigidity to receive the second coat.
2512.8.1 Admixtures. When using this method of applica-
tion, calcium aluminate cement up to 15 percent of the
weight of the portland cement is permitted to be added to the
mix.
2512.8.2 Curing. Curing of the first coat is permitted to be
omitted and the second coat shall be cured as set forth in
ASTM C 926 and Table 2512.6.
2512.9 Finish coats. Cement plaster finish coats shall be
applied over base coats that have been in place for the time peri-
ods set forth in ASTM C 926. The third or finish coat shall be
applied with sufficient material and pressure to bond and to
cover the brown coat and shall be of sufficient thickness to con-
ceal the brown coat.

SECTION 2513
EXPOSED AGGREGATE PLASTER

2513.1 General. Exposed natural or integrally colored aggre-
gate is permitted to be partially embedded in a natural or col-
ored bedding coat of cement plaster or gypsum plaster, subject
to the provisions of this section.
2513.2 Aggregate. The aggregate shall be applied manually or
mechanically and shall consist of marble chips, pebbles or sim-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

533

25_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:52 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER

ilar durable, moderately hard (three or more on the Mohs hard-
ness scale), nonreactive materials.
2513.3 Bedding coat proportions. The bedding coat for inte-
rior or exterior surfaces shall be composed of one part portland
cement and one part Type S lime; or one part blended cement
and one part Type S lime; or masonry cement; or plastic
cement, and a maximum of three parts of graded white or natu-
ral sand by volume. The bedding coat for interior surfaces shall
be composed of 100 pounds (45.4 kg) of neat gypsum plaster
and a maximum of 200 pounds (90.8 kg) of graded white sand.
A factory-prepared bedding coat for interior or exterior use is
permitted. The bedding coat for exterior surfaces shall have a
minimum compressive strength of 1,000 pounds per square
inch (psi) (6895 kPa).
2513.4 Application. The bedding coat is permitted to be
applied directly over the first (scratch) coat of plaster, provided
the ultimate overall thickness is a minimum of 7/8 inch (22 mm),
including lath. Over concrete or masonry surfaces, the overall
thickness shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).
2513.5 Bases. Exposed aggregate plaster is permitted to be
applied over concrete, masonry, cement plaster base coats or
gypsum plaster base coats installed in accordance with Section
2511 or 2512.
2513.6 Preparation of masonry and concrete. Masonry and
concrete surfaces shall be prepared in accordance with the pro-
visions of Section 2510.7.
2513.7 Curing of base coats. Cement plaster base coats shall
be cured in accordance with ASTM C 926. Cement plaster bed-
ding coats shall retain sufficient moisture for hydration (hard-
ening) for 24 hours minimum or, where necessary, shall be kept
damp for 24 hours by light water spraying.

534

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

25_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:21)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:15:52 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 26

PLASTIC

SECTION 2601
GENERAL

2601.1 Scope. These provisions shall govern the materials,
design, application, construction and installation of foam plas-
tic, foam plastic insulation, plastic veneer, interior plastic finish
and trim and light-transmitting plastics. See Chapter 14 for
requirements for exterior wall finish and trim.

SECTION 2602
DEFINITIONS

2602.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
FIBER REINFORCED POLYMER. A polymeric compos-
ite material consisting of reinforcement fibers impregnated
with a fiber-binding polymer which is then molded and hard-
ened.
FIBERGLASS REINFORCED POLYMER. A polymeric
composite material consisting of glass reinforcement fibers
impregnated with a fiber-binding polymer which is then
molded and hardened.
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. A plastic that is intention-
ally expanded by the use of a foaming agent to produce a
reduced-density plastic containing voids consisting of open or
closed cells distributed throughout the plastic for thermal insu-
lating or acoustical purposes and that has a density less than 20
pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (320 kg/m3).
LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM. Construction consisting in
whole or in part of lenses, panels, grids or baffles made with
light-transmitting plastics positioned below independently
mounted electrical light sources, skylights or light-transmitting
plastic roof panels. Lenses, panels, grids and baffles that are
part of an electrical fixture shall not be considered as a
light-diffusing system.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS.
Structural plastic panels other than skylights that are fastened
to structural members, or panels or sheathing and that are used
as light-transmitting media in the plane of the roof.
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS.
Plastic materials that are fastened to structural members, or to
structural panels or sheathing, and that are used as light-trans-
mitting media in exterior walls.
PLASTIC, APPROVED. Any thermoplastic, thermosetting
or reinforced thermosetting plastic material that conforms to
combustibility classifications specified in the section applica-
ble to the application and plastic type.
PLASTIC GLAZING. Plastic materials that are glazed or set
in frame or sash and not held by mechanical fasteners that pass
through the glazing material.

➡

THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL. A plastic material that is
capable of being repeatedly softened by increase of tempera-
ture and hardened by decrease of temperature.
THERMOSETTING MATERIAL. A plastic material that is
capable of being changed into a substantially nonreformable
product when cured.

SECTION 2603
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION

2603.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
requirements and uses of foam plastic insulation in buildings
and structures.
2603.2 Labeling and identification. Packages and containers
of foam plastic insulation and foam plastic insulation compo-
nents delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an
approved agency showing the manufacturer’s name, product
listing, product identification and information sufficient to
determine that the end use will comply with the code require-
ments.
2603.3 Surface-burning characteristics. Unless otherwise
indicated in this section, foam plastic insulation and foam plas-
tic cores of manufactured assemblies shall have a flame spread
index of not more than 75 and a smoke-developed index of not
more than 450 where tested in the maximum thickness
intended for use in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.
Loose fill-type foam plastic insulation shall be tested as board
stock for the flame spread and smoke-developed indexes.
Exceptions:
1. Smoke-developed index for interior trim as provided
for in Section 2604.2.
2. In cold storage buildings, ice plants, food plants, food
processing rooms and similar areas, foam plastic
insulation where tested in a thickness of 4 inches (102
mm) shall be permitted in a thickness up to 10 inches
(254 mm) where the building is equipped throughout
with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1. The approved automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided in both the room
and that part of the building in which the room is
located.
3. Foam plastic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or
C roof-covering assembly provided the assembly
with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes
FM 4450 or UL 1256. The smoke-developed index
shall not be limited for roof applications.
4. Foam plastic insulation greater than 4 inches (102
mm) in thickness shall have a maximum flame spread
index of 75 and a smoke-developed index of 450
where tested at a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102
mm), provided the end use is approved in accordance

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

535

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:32 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

with Section 2603.9 using the thickness and density
intended for use.
5. Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes for foam
plastic interior signs in covered mall buildings pro-
vided the signs comply with Section 402.15.
2603.4 Thermal barrier. Except as provided for in Sections
2603.4.1 and 2603.9, foam plastic shall be separated from the
interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier of 1/2-inch
(12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard or equivalent thermal barrier
material that will limit the average temperature rise of the unex-
posed surface to not more than 250ºF (120°C) after 15 minutes
of fire exposure, complying with the standard time-tempera-
ture curve of ASTM E 119 or UL 263. The thermal barrier shall
be installed in such a manner that it will remain in place for 15
minutes based on FM 4880, UL 1040, NFPA 286 or UL 1715.
Combustible concealed spaces shall comply with Section 717.
2603.4.1 Thermal barrier not required. The thermal bar-
rier specified in Section 2603.4 is not required under the
conditions set
forth in Sections 2603.4.1.1 through
2603.4.1.13.
2603.4.1.1 Masonry or concrete construction. A ther-
mal barrier is not required for foam plastic installed in a
masonry or concrete wall, floor or roof system where the
foam plastic insulation is covered on each face by a mini-
mum of 1 inch (25 mm) thickness of masonry or con-
crete.
2603.4.1.2 Cooler and freezer walls. Foam plastic
installed in a maximum thickness of 10 inches (254 mm)
in cooler and freezer walls shall:
1. Have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a
smoke-developed index of not more than 450,
where tested in a minimum 4 inch (102 mm) thick-
ness.
2. Have flash ignition and self-ignition temperatures
of not less than 600°F and 800°F (316°C and
427°C), respectively.
3. Have a covering of not less than 0.032-inch (0.8
mm) aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having
a base metal thickness not less than 0.0160 inch
(0.4 mm) at any point.
4. Be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where the
cooler or freezer is within a building, both the
cooler or freezer and that part of the building in
which it is located shall be sprinklered.
2603.4.1.3 Walk-in coolers. In nonsprinklered build-
ings, foam plastic having a thickness that does not
exceed 4 inches (102 mm) and a maximum flame spread
index of 75 is permitted in walk-in coolers or freezer
units where the aggregate floor area does not exceed 400
square feet (37 m2) and the foam plastic is covered by a
metal facing not less than 0.032-inch-thick (0.81 mm)
aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a minimum
base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.41 mm). A thick-
ness of up to 10 inches (254 mm) is permitted where pro-
tected by a thermal barrier.

536

2603.4.1.4 Exterior walls—one-story buildings. For
one-story buildings, foam plastic having a flame spread
index of 25 or less, and a smoke-developed index of not
more than 450, shall be permitted without thermal barri-
ers in or on exterior walls in a thickness not more than 4
inches (102 mm) where the foam plastic is covered by a
thickness of not less than 0.032-inch-thick (0.81 mm)
aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a base
metal thickness of 0.0160 inch (0.41 mm) and the build-
ing is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2603.4.1.5 Roofing. Foam plastic insulation under a roof
assembly or roof covering that is installed in accordance
with the code and the manufacturer’s instructions shall
be separated from the interior of the building by wood
structural panel sheathing not less than 0.47 inch (11.9
mm) in thickness bonded with exterior glue, with edges
supported by blocking, tongue-and-groove joints or
other approved type of edge support, or an equivalent
material. A thermal barrier is not required for foam plas-
tic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or C roof-cover-
ing assembly, provided the assembly with the foam
plastic insulation satisfactorily passes FM 4450 or UL
1256.

2603.4.1.6 Attics and crawl spaces. Within an attic or
crawl space where entry is made only for service of utili-
ties, foam plastic insulation shall be protected against
ignition by 11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) mineral fiber insula-
tion; 1/4-inch-thick (6.4 mm) wood structural panel,
particleboard or hardboard; 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) gypsum
wallboard, corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal
thickness of 0.016 inch (0.4 mm) or other approved
material installed in such a manner that the foam plastic
insulation is not exposed. The protective covering shall
be consistent with the requirements for the type of con-
struction.

2603.4.1.7 Doors not required to have a fire protec-
tion rating. Where pivoted or side-hinged doors are per-
mitted without a fire protection rating, foam plastic
insulation, having a flame spread index of 75 or less and a
smoke-developed index of not more than 450, shall be
permitted as a core material where the door facing is of
metal having a minimum thickness of 0.032-inch (0.8
mm) aluminum or steel having a base metal thickness of
not less than 0.016 inch (0.4 mm) at any point.

2603.4.1.8 Exterior doors in buildings of Group R-2
or R-3. In occupancies classified as Group R-2 or R-3,
foam-filled exterior entrance doors to individual dwell-
ing units that do not require a fire-resistance rating shall
be faced with wood or other approved materials.

2603.4.1.9 Garage doors. Where garage doors are per-
mitted without a fire-resistance rating and foam plastic is
used as a core material, the door facing shall be metal
having a minimum thickness of 0.032-inch (0.8 mm) alu-
minum or 0.010-inch (0.25 mm) steel or the facing shall
be minimum 0.125-inch-thick (3.2 mm) wood. Garage
doors having facings other than those described above

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:32 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

shall be tested in accordance with, and meet the accep-
tance criteria of, DASMA 107.
Exception: Garage doors using foam plastic insula-
tion complying with Section 2603.3 in detached and
attached garages associated with one- and two-family
dwellings need not be provided with a thermal barrier.
2603.4.1.10 Siding backer board. Foam plastic insula-
tion of not more than 2,000 British thermal units per
square feet (Btu/sq. ft.) (22.7 mJ/m2) as determined by
NFPA 259 shall be permitted as a siding backer board
with a maximum thickness of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm), pro-
vided it is separated from the interior of the building by
not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of mineral fiber insulation
or equivalent or where applied as insulation with residing
over existing wall construction.
2603.4.1.11 Interior trim. Foam plastic used as interior
trim in accordance with Section 2604 shall be permitted
without a thermal barrier.
2603.4.1.12 Interior signs. Foam plastic used for inte-
rior signs in covered mall buildings in accordance with
Section 402.16 shall be permitted without a thermal bar-
rier. Foam plastic signs that are not affixed to interior
building surfaces shall comply with Chapter 8 of the
International Fire Code.

2603.4.1.13 Type V construction. Foam plastic spray
applied to a sill plate and header of Type V construction
is subject to all of the following:
1. The maximum thickness of the foam plastic shall
be 31/4 inches (82.6 mm).
2. The density of the foam plastic shall be in the range
of 1.5 to 2.0 pcf (24 to 32 kg/m3).
3. The foam plastic shall have a flame spread index of
25 or less and an accompanying smoke-developed
index of 450 or less when tested in accordance
with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.
2603.5 Exterior walls of buildings of any height. Exterior
walls of buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction of any
height shall comply with Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7.
Exterior walls of cold storage buildings required to be con-
structed of noncombustible materials, where the building is
more than one story in height, shall also comply with the provi-
sions of Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Exterior walls of
buildings of Type V construction shall comply with Sections
2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4.
2603.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated walls. Where the wall is
required to have a fire-resistance rating, data based on tests
conducted in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall
be provided to substantiate that the fire-resistance rating is
maintained.
2603.5.2 Thermal barrier. Any foam plastic insulation
shall be separated from the building interior by a thermal
barrier meeting the provisions of Section 2603.4, unless
special approval is obtained on the basis of Section 2603.9.
Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section
2603.4.1.4.

PLASTIC

2603.5.3 Potential heat. The potential heat of foam plastic
insulation in any portion of the wall or panel shall not
exceed the potential heat expressed in Btu per square feet
(mJ/m2) of the foam plastic insulation contained in the wall
assembly tested in accordance with Section 2603.5.5. The
potential heat of the foam plastic insulation shall be deter-
mined by tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 259 and
the results shall be expressed in Btu per square feet (mJ/m2).
Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section
2603.4.1.4.
2603.5.4 Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes.
Foam plastic insulation, exterior coatings and facings shall
be tested separately in the thickness intended for use, but not
to exceed 4 inches (102 mm), and shall each have a flame
spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of
450 or less as determined in accordance with ASTM E 84 or
UL 723.
Exception: Prefabricated or factory-manufactured pan-
els having minimum 0.020-inch (0.51 mm) aluminum
facings and a total thickness of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) or less
are permitted to be tested as an assembly where the foam
plastic core is not exposed in the course of construction.
2603.5.5 Test standard. The wall assembly shall be tested
in accordance with and comply with the acceptance criteria
of NFPA 285.
Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section
2603.4.1.4.
2603.5.6 Label required. The edge or face of each piece of
foam plastic insulation shall bear the label of an approved
agency. The label shall contain the manufacturer’s or dis-
tributor’s identification, model number, serial number or
definitive information describing the product or materials’
performance characteristics and approved agency’s identi-
fication.
2603.5.7 Ignition. Exterior walls shall not exhibit sustained
flaming where tested in accordance with NFPA 268. Where
a material is intended to be installed in more than one thick-
ness,
tests of the minimum and maximum thickness
intended for use shall be performed.
Exception: Assemblies protected on the outside with
one of the following:
1. A thermal barrier complying with Section 2603.4.
2. A minimum 1 inch (25 mm) thickness of concrete
or masonry.
3. Glass-fiber-reinforced concrete panels of a mini-
mum thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).
4. Me ta l - faced pane ls hav ing m in imum 0 .019 -
inch-thick (0.48 mm) aluminum or 0.016-inch-
thick (0.41 mm) corrosion-resistant steel outer fac-
ings.
5. A minimum 7/8 inch (22.2 mm) thickness of stucco
complying with Section 2510.
2603.6 Roofing. Foam plastic insulation meeting the require-
ments of Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4 shall be permit-
ted as part of a roof-covering assembly, provided the assembly

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

537

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:33 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

with the foam plastic insulation is a Class A, B or C roofing
assembly where tested in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL
790.

2603.7 Plenums. Foam plastic insulation shall not be used as
interior wall or ceiling finish in plenums except as permitted in
Section 2604 or when protected by a thermal barrier in accor-
dance with Section 2603.4.

2603.8 Protection against termites. In areas where the proba-
bility of termite infestation is very heavy in accordance with
F i g u r e 2 6 0 3 . 8 , ex t r u d e d a n d ex p a n d e d p o l y s t y r e n e ,
polyisocyanurate and other foam plastics shall not be installed
on the exterior face or under interior or exterior foundation
walls or slab foundations located below grade. The clearance
between foam plastics installed above grade and exposed earth
shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm).

Exceptions:
1. Buildings where the structural members of walls,
f loo rs , ce i l ings and roo fs a re en t ire ly o f non-
combustible materials or preservative-treated wood.
2. An approved method of protecting the foam plastic
and structure from subterranean termite damage is
provided.
3. On the interior side of basement walls.

2603.9 Special approval. Foam plastic shall not be required to
comply with the requirements of Sections 2603.4 through
2603.7 where specifically approved based on large-scale tests
such as, but not limited to, NFPA 286 (with the acceptance cri-
teria of Section 803.2), FM 4880, UL 1040 or UL 1715. Such
testing shall be related to the actual end-use configuration and
be performed on the finished manufactured foam plastic
assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use. Foam
plastics that are used as interior finish on the basis of special
tests shall also conform to the flame spread requirements of
Chapter 8. Assemblies tested shall include seams, joints and
other typical details used in the installation of the assembly and
shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

SECTION 2604
INTERIOR FINISH AND TRIM

2604.1 General. Plastic materials installed as interior finish or
trim shall comply with Chapter 8. Foam plastics shall only be
installed as interior finish where approved in accordance with
the special provisions of Section 2603.9. Foam plastics that are
used as interior finish shall also meet the flame-spread index
requirements for interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8.
Foam plastics installed as interior trim shall comply with Sec-
tion 2604.2.

VERY HEAVY

MODERATE TO HEAVY

SLIGHT TO MODERATE

NONE TO SLIGHT

538

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

FIGURE 2603.8
TERMITE INFESTATION PROBABILITY MAP

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:33 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

[F] 2604.2 Interior trim. Foam plastic used as interior trim
shall comply with Sections 2604.2.1 through 2604.2.4.
[F] 2604.2.1 Density. The minimum density of the interior
trim shall be 20 pcf (320 kg/m3).
[F] 2604.2.2 Thickness. The maximum thickness of the
interior trim shall be 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) and the maximum
width shall be 8 inches (204 mm).
[F] 2604.2.3 Area limitation. The interior trim shall not
constitute more than 10 percent of the specific wall or ceil-
ing areas to which it is attached.
[F] 2604.2.4 Flame spread. The flame spread index shall
not exceed 75 where tested in accordance with ASTM E 84
or UL 723. The smoke-developed index shall not be limited.
Exception: When the interior trim material has been
tested as an interior finish in accordance with NFPA 286
and complies with the acceptance criteria in Section
803.1.2.1, it shall not be required to be tested for flame
spread index in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.

SECTION 2605
PLASTIC VENEER

2605.1 Interior use. Where used within a building, plastic
veneer shall comply with the interior finish requirements of
Chapter 8.
2605.2 Exterior use. Exterior plastic veneer, other than plastic
siding, shall be permitted to be installed on the exterior walls of
buildings of any type of construction in accordance with all of
the following requirements:
1. Plastic veneer shall comply with Section 2606.4.
2. Plastic veneer shall not be attached to any exterior wall to
a height greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above grade.
3. Sections of plastic veneer shall not exceed 300 square
feet (27.9 m2) in area and shall be separated by a mini-
mum of 4 feet (1219 mm) vertically.
Exception: The area and separation requirements and
the smoke-density limitation are not applicable to
plastic veneer applied to buildings constructed of
Type VB construction, provided the walls are not
required to have a fire-resistance rating.
2605.3 Plastic siding. Plastic siding shall comply with the
requirements of Sections 1404 and 1405.

SECTION 2606
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTICS

2606.1 General. The provisions of this section and Sections
2607 through 2611 shall govern the quality and methods of
application of light-transmitting plastics for use as light-trans-
mitting materials in buildings and structures. Foam plastics
shall comply with Section 2603. Light-transmitting plastic
materials that meet the other code requirements for walls and
roofs shall be permitted to be used in accordance with the other
applicable chapters of the code.

PLASTIC

2606.2 Approval for use. Sufficient technical data shall be
submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any light-trans-
mitting material, as approved by the building official and sub-
ject to the requirements of this section.
2606.3 Identification. Each unit or package of light-transmit-
ting plastic shall be identified with a mark or decal satisfactory
to the building official, which includes identification as to the
material classification.
2606.4 Specifications. Light-transmitting plastics, including
thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting plas-
tic material, shall have a self-ignition temperature of 650ºF
(343ºC) or greater where tested in accordance with ASTM D
1929; a smoke-developed index not greater than 450 where
tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with
ASTM E 84 or UL 723, or a maximum average smoke density
rating not greater than 75 where tested in the thickness intended
for use in accordance with ASTM D 2843 and shall conform to
one of the following combustibility classifications:
Class CC1: Plastic materials that have a burning extent of 1
inch (25 mm) or less where tested at a nominal thickness of
0.060 inch (1.5 mm), or in the thickness intended for use, in
accordance with ASTM D 635.
Class CC2: Plastic materials that have a burning rate of 21/2
inches per minute (1.06 mm/s) or less where tested at a nom-
inal thickness of 0.060 inch (1.5 mm), or in the thickness
intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D 635.
2606.5 Structural requirements. Light-transmitting plastic
materials in their assembly shall be of adequate strength and
durability to withstand the loads indicated in Chapter 16. Tech-
nical data shall be submitted to establish stresses, maximum
unsupported spans and such other information for the various
thicknesses and forms used as deemed necessary by the build-
ing official.
2606.6 Fastening. Fastening shall be adequate to withstand the
loads in Chapter 16. Proper allowance shall be made for expan-
sion and contraction of light-transmitting plastic materials in
accordance with accepted data on the coefficient of expansion
of the material and other material in conjunction with which it
is employed.
2606.7 Light-diffusing systems. Unless the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, light-diffusing systems
shall not be installed in the following occupancies and loca-
tions:
1. Group A with an occupant load of 1,000 or more.
2. Theaters with a stage and proscenium opening and an
occupant load of 700 or more.
3. Group I-2.
4. Group I-3.
5. Vertical exit enclosures and exit passageways.
2606.7.1 Support. Light-transmitting plastic diffusers shall
be supported directly or indirectly from ceiling or roof con-
struction by use of noncombustible hangers. Hangers shall
be at least No. 12 steel-wire gage (0.106 inch) galvanized
wire or equivalent.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

539

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:34 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

2606.7.2 Installation. Light-transmitting plastic diffusers
shall comply with Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting
plastic diffusers will fall from the mountings before ignit-
ing, at an ambient temperature of at least 200°F (111°C)
below the ignition temperature of the panels. The panels
shall remain in place at an ambient room temperature of
175°F (79°C) for a period of not less than 15 minutes.
2606.7.3 Size limitations. Individual panels or units shall
not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) in length nor 30 square feet
(2.79 m2) in area.
2606.7.4 Fire suppression system. In buildings that are
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, plastic light-diffusing
systems shall be protected both above and below unless the
sprinkler system has been specifically approved for installa-
tion only above the light-diffusing system. Areas of
light-diffusing systems that are protected in accordance
with this section shall not be limited.
2606.7.5 Electrical luminaires. Light-transmitting plastic
panels and light-diffuser panels that are installed in
approved electrical
luminaires shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting
plastic panels conform to the requirements of Section
2606.7.2. The area of approved light-transmitting plastic
materials that are used in required exits or corridors shall
not exceed 30 percent of the aggregate area of the ceiling in
which such panels are installed, unless the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2606.8 Partitions. Light-transmitting plastics used in or as
partitions shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 6
and 8.
2606.9 Bathroom accessories. Light-transmitting plastics
shall be permitted as glazing in shower stalls, shower doors,
bathtub enclosures and similar accessory units. Safety glazing
shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 24.
2606.10 Awnings, patio covers and similar structures. Awn-
ings constructed of light-transmitting plastics shall be con-
structed in accordance with the provisions specified in Section
3105 and Chapter 32 for projections. Patio covers constructed
of light-transmitting plastics shall comply with Section 2606.
Light-transmitting plastics used in canopies at motor fuel-dis-
pensing facilities shall comply with Section 2606, except as
modified by Section 406.5.3.
2606.11 Greenhouses. Light-transmitting plastics shall be
permitted in lieu of plain glass in greenhouses.
2606.12 Solar collectors. Light-transmitting plastic covers on
solar collectors having noncombustible sides and bottoms shall
be permitted on buildings not over three stories above grade
plane or 9,000 square feet (836.1 m2) in total floor area, pro-
vided the light-transmitting plastic cover does not exceed 33.33
percent of the roof area for CC1 materials or 25 percent of the
roof area for CC2 materials.
Exception: Light-transmitting plastic covers having a
thickness of 0.010 inch (0.3 mm) or less or shall be permit-

ted to be of any plastic material provided the area of the solar
collectors does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area.

SECTION 2607
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS

2607.1 General. Light-transmitting plastics shall not be used
as wall panels in exterior walls in occupancies in Groups A-l,
A-2, H, I-2 and I-3. In other groups, light-transmitting plastics
shall be permitted to be used as wall panels in exterior walls,
provided that the walls are not required to have a fire-resistance
rating and the installation conforms to the requirements of this
section. Such panels shall be erected and anchored on a founda-
tion, waterproofed or otherwise protected from moisture
absorption and sealed with a coat of mastic or other approved
waterproof coating. Light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall
also comply with Section 2606.
2607.2 Installation. Exterior wall panels installed as provided
for herein shall not alter the type of construction classification
of the building.
2607.3 Height limitation. Light-transmitting plastics shall not
be installed more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above grade plane,
except as allowed by Section 2607.5.
2607.4 Area limitation and separation. The maximum area
of a single wall panel and minimum vertical and horizontal sep-
aration requirements for exterior light-transmitting plastic wall
panels shall be as provided for in Table 2607.4. The maximum
percentage of wall area of any story in light-transmitting plastic
wall panels shall not exceed that indicated in Table 2607.4 or
the percentage of unprotected openings permitted by Section
705.8, whichever is smaller.
Exceptions:
1. In structures provided with approved flame barriers
extending 30 inches (760 mm) beyond the exterior
wall in the plane of the floor, a vertical separation is
not required at the floor except that provided by the
vertical thickness of the flame barrier projection.
2. Veneers of approved weather-resistant light-transmit-
ting plastics used as exterior siding in buildings of
Type V construction in compliance with Section 1406.
3. The area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels in
exterior walls of greenhouses shall be exempt from
the area limitations of Table 2607.4 but shall be lim-
ited as required for unprotected openings in accor-
dance with Section 704.8.
2607.5 Automatic sprinkler system. Where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the maximum percentage
area of exterior wall in any story in light-transmitting plastic
wall panels and the maximum square footage of a single area
given in Table 2607.4 shall be increased 100 percent, but the
area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall not exceed
50 percent of the wall area in any story, or the area permitted by
Section 704.8 for unprotected openings, whichever is smaller.
These installations shall be exempt from height limitations.

540

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:34 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

TABLE 2607.4
AREA LIMITATION AND SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELSa

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
(feet)

CLASS OF
PLASTIC

MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE
AREA OF EXTERIOR WALL IN
PLASTIC WALL PANELS

MAXIMUM SINGLE AREA
OF PLASTIC WALL PANELS
(square feet)

MINIMUM SEPARATION OF
PLASTIC WALL PANELS (feet)

Vertical

Horizontal

Less than 6

6 or more but less than 11

11 or more but less than or equal to 30

Over 30

¾

CC1
CC2
CC1
CC2
CC1
CC2

Not Permitted
10
Not Permitted
25
15
50
50

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. For combinations of plastic glazing and plastic wall panel areas permitted, see Section 2607.6.
b. For reductions in vertical separation allowed, see Section 2607.4.

Not Permitted
50
Not Permitted
90
70
Not Limited
100

¾

8

¾

6
8
3b
6b

¾

4

¾

4
4
0
3

2607.6 Combinations of glazing and wall panels. Combina-
tions of light-transmitting plastic glazing and light-transmit-
ting plastic wall panels shall be subject to the area, height and
percentage limitations and the separation requirements appli-
cable to the class of light-transmitting plastic as prescribed for
light-transmitting plastic wall panel installations.

SECTION 2608
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC GLAZING

2608.1 Buildings of Type VB construction. Openings in the
exterior walls of buildings of Type VB construction, where not
required to be protected by Section 704, shall be permitted to be
glazed or equipped with light-transmitting plastic. Light-trans-
mitting plastic glazing shall also comply with Section 2606.

2608.2 Buildings of other types of construction. Openings in
the exterior walls of buildings of types of construction other
than Type VB, where not required to be protected by Section
704, shall be permitted to be glazed or equipped with
light-transmitting plastic in accordance with Section 2606 and
all of the following:

1. The aggregate area of light-transmitting plastic glazing
shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of any wall face of
the story in which it is installed. The area of a single pane
of glazing installed above the first story above grade
plane shall not exceed 16 square feet (1.5 m2) and the
vertical dimension of a single pane shall not exceed 4 feet
(1219 mm).

Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is
provided throughout in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1, the area of allowable glazing shall be
increased to a maximum of 50 percent of the wall face of
the story in which it is installed with no limit on the max-
imum dimension or area of a single pane of glazing.

2. Approved flame barriers extending 30 inches (762 mm)
beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor, or verti-
cal panels not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in height, shall be
installed between glazed units located in adjacent stories.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1.
3. Light-transmitting plastics shall not be installed more
than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above grade level.
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sec-
tion 903.3.1.1.

SECTION 2609
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS

2609.1 General. Light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall
comply with this section and Section 2606. Light-transmitting
plastic roof panels shall not be installed in Groups H, I-2 and
I-3. In all other groups, light-transmitting plastic roof panels
shall comply with any one of the following conditions:
1. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. The roof construction is not required to have a fire-resis-
tance rating by Table 601.
3. The roof panels meet the requirements for roof coverings
in accordance with Chapter 15.
2609.2 Separation. Individual roof panels shall be separated
from each other by a distance of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm)
measured in a horizontal plane.
Exceptions:
1. The separation between roof panels is not required in a
building equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. The separation between roof panels is not required in
low-hazard occupancy buildings complying with the
conditions of Section 2609.4, Exception 2 or 3.
2609.3 Location. Where exterior wall openings are required to
be protected by Section 705.8, a roof panel shall not be
installed within 6 feet (1829 mm) of such exterior wall.
2609.4 Area limitations. Roof panels shall be limited in area
and the aggregate area of panels shall be limited by a percent-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

541

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:35 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

age of the floor area of the room or space sheltered in accor-
dance with Table 2609.4.
Exceptions:
1. The area limitations of Table 2609.4 shall be permit-
ted to be increased by 100 percent in buildings
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Low-hazard occupancy buildings, such as swimming
pool shelters, shall be exempt from the area limitations
of Table 2609.4, provided that the buildings do not
exceed 5,000 square feet (465 m2) in area and have a
minimum fire separation distance of 10 feet (3048
mm).
3. Greenhouses that are occupied for growing plants on
a production or research basis, without public access,
shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table
2609.4 provided they have a minimum fire separation
distance of 4 feet (1220 mm).
4. Roof coverings over terraces and patios in occupan-
cies in Group R-3 shall be exempt from the area limi-
tations of Table 2609.4 and shall be permitted with
light-transmitting plastics.

TABLE 2609.4
AREA LIMITATIONS FOR LIGHT-TRANSMITTING
PLASTIC ROOF PANELS

CLASS
OF
PLASTIC

MAXIMUM AREA OF
INDIVIDUAL ROOF PANELS
(square feet)

MAXIMUM AGGREGATE
AREA OF ROOF PANELS
(percent of floor area)

CC1
CC2

300
100

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

30
25

SECTION 2610
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC
SKYLIGHT GLAZING
2610 .1 Light-transmitting plastic g lazing of skylight
assemblies. Skylight assemblies glazed with light-transmitting
plastic shall conform to the provisions of this section and Sec-
tion 2606. Unit skylights glazed with light-transmitting plastic
shall also comply with Section 2405.5.
Exception: Skylights in which the light-transmitting plastic
conforms to the required roof-covering class in accordance
with Section 1505.
2610.2 Mounting. The light-transmitting plastic shall be
mounted above the plane of the roof on a curb constructed in
accordance with the requirements for the type of construction
classification, but at least 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the
roof. Edges of light-transmitting plastic skylights or domes shall
be protected by metal or other approved noncombustible material,
or the light-transmitting plastic dome or skylight shall be shown to
be able to resist ignition where exposed at the edge to a flame from
a Class B brand as described in ASTM E 108 or UL 790.
Exceptions:
1. Curbs shall not be required for skylights used on roofs
having a minimum slope of three units vertical in 12

units horizontal (25-percent slope) in occupancies in
Group R-3 and on buildings with a nonclassified roof
covering.
2. The metal or noncombustible edge material is not
required where nonclassified roof coverings are per-
mitted.
2610.3 Slope. Flat or corrugated light-transmitting plastic sky-
lights shall slope at least four units vertical in 12 units horizon-
tal (4 :12) . Dome-shaped sky ligh ts sha ll r ise above the
mounting flange a minimum distance equal to 10 percent of the
maximum span of the dome but not less than 3 inches (76 mm).
Exception: Skylights that pass the Class B Burning Brand
Test specified in ASTM E 108 or UL 790.
2610.4 Maximum area of skylights. Each skylight shall have
a maximum area within the curb of 100 square feet (9.3 m2).
Exception: The area limitation shall not apply where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the
building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accor-
dance with Section 910.
2610.5 Aggregate area of skylights. The aggregate area of
skylights shall not exceed 331/3 percent of the floor area of the
room or space sheltered by the roof in which such skylights are
installed where Class CC1 materials are utilized, and 25 per-
cent where Class CC2 materials are utilized.
Exception: The aggregate area limitations of light-trans-
mitting plastic skylights shall be increased 100 percent
beyond the limitations set forth in this section where the
building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprin-
kler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the
building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accor-
dance with Section 910.
2610.6 Separation. Skylights shall be separated from each
other by a distance of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) measured
in a horizontal plane.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
s p r i n k l e r s y s t em i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1.
2. In Group R-3, multiple skylights located above the
same room or space with a combined area not exceed-
ing the limits set forth in Section 2610.4.
2610.7 Location. Where exterior wall openings are required to
be protected in accordance with Section 705, a skylight shall
not be installed within 6 feet (1829 mm) of such exterior wall.
2610.8 Combinations of roof panels and skylights. Combi-
nations of light-transmitting plastic roof panels and skylights
shall be subject to the area and percentage limitations and sepa-
ration requirements applicable to roof panel installations.

SECTION 2611
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC INTERIOR SIGNS

2611.1 General. Light-transmitting plastic interior wall signs
shall be limited as specified in Sections 2611.2 through 2611.4.

542

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:35 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Light-transmitting plastic interior wall signs in covered mall
buildings shall comply with Section 402.16. Light-transmit-
ting plastic interior signs shall also comply with Section 2606.
2611.2 Aggregate area. The sign shall not exceed 20 percent
of the wall area.
2611.3 Maximum area. The sign shall not exceed 24 square
feet (2.23 m2).
2611.4 Encasement. Edges and backs of the sign shall be fully
encased in metal.

SECTION 2612
FIBER REINFORCED POLYMER AND
FIBERGLASS REINFORCED POLYMER

2612.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
requirements and uses of fiber reinforced polymer or fiberglass
reinforced polymer in and on buildings and structures.
2612.2 Labeling and identification. Packages and containers
of fiber reinforced polymer or fiberglass reinforced polymer
and their components delivered to the job site shall bear the
label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer’s name,
product listing, product identification and information suffi-
cient to determine that the end use will comply with the code
requirements.
2612.3 Interior finish. Fiber reinforced polymer or fiberglass
reinforced polymer used as interior finish shall comply with
Chapter 8.
2612.4 Decorative materials and trim. Fiber reinforced poly-
mer or fiberglass reinforced polymer used as decorative mate-
rials or trim shall comply with Section 806.
2612.5 Light-transmitting materials. Fiber reinforced poly-
mer or fiberglass reinforced polymer used as light-transmitting
materials shall comply with Sections 2606 through 2611 as
required for the specific application.
2612.6 Exterior use. Fiber reinforced polymer or fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall be permitted to be installed on the
exterior walls of buildings of any type of construction when
such polymers meet the requirements of Section 2603.5 and is
fireblocked in accordance with Section 717. The fiber rein-
forced polymer or the fiberglass reinforced polymer shall be
designed for uniform live loads as required in Table 1607.1 as
well as for snow loads, wind loads and earthquake loads as
specified in Sections 1608, 1609 and 1613, respectively.
Exceptions:
1. When all of the following conditions are met:
1.1. When the area of the fiber reinforced polymer
or the fiberglass reinforced polymer does not
exceed 20 percent of the respective wall area,
the fiber reinforced polymer or the fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread
index of 25 or less or when the area of the fiber
reinforced polymer or the fiberglass reinforced
polymer does not exceed 10 percent of the re-

PLASTIC

spective wall area, the fiber reinforced polymer
or the fiberglass reinforced polymer shall have a
flame spread index of 75 or less. The flame
spread index requirement shall not be required
for coatings or paints having a thickness of less
than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) that are applied di-
rectly to the surface of the fiber reinforced poly-
mer or the fiberglass reinforced polymer.
1.2. Fireblocking complying with Section 717.2.6
shall be installed.
1.3. The fiber reinforced polymer or the fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall be installed directly
to a noncombustible substrate or be separated
from the exterior wall by one of the following
materials: corrosion-resistant steel having a
minimum base metal thickness of 0.016 inch
(0.41 mm) at any point, aluminum having a
minimum thickness of 0.019 inch (0.5 mm) or
other approved noncombustible material.
1.4. The fiber reinforced polymer or the fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall be designed for uni-
form live loads as required in Table 1607.1 as
well as for snow loads, wind loads and earth-
quake loads as specified in Sections 1608,
1609 and 1613, respectively.
2. When installed on buildings that are 40 feet (12 190
mm) or less above grade, the fiber reinforced polymer
or the fiberglass reinforced polymer shall meet the
requirements of Section 1406.2 and shall comply
with all of the following conditions:
2.1. Where the fire separation distance is 5 feet
(1524 mm) or less, the area of the fiber rein-
forced polymer or the fiberglass reinforced
polymer shall not exceed 10 percent of the
wall area. Where the fire separation distance
is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), there shall be
no limit on the area of the exterior wall cover-
age using fiber reinforced polymer or the fi-
berglass reinforced polymer.
2.2. The fiber reinforced polymer or the fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread
index of 200 or less. The flame spread index
requirement shall not be required for coatings
or paints having a thickness of less than 0.036
inch (0.9 mm) that are applied directly to the
surface of the fiber reinforced polymer or the
fiberglass reinforced polymer.
2.3. Fireblocking complying with Section 717.2.6
shall be installed.
2.4. The fiber reinforced polymer or the fiberglass
reinforced polymer shall be designed for uni-
form live loads as required in Table 1607.1 as
well as for snow loads, wind loads and earth-
quake loads as specified in Sections 1608,
1609 and 1613, respectively.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

543

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:35 AM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLASTIC

SECTION 2613
REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE INSULATION

2613.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the
requirements and uses of reflective plastic core insulation in
buildings and structures. Reflective plastic core insulation shall
comply with the requirements of Section 2613.2 and of one of
the following: Section 2613.3 or 2613.4.
2613.2 Identification. Packages and containers of reflective
plastic core insulation delivered to the job site shall show the
manufacturer’s or supplier’s name, product identification and
information sufficient to determine that the end use will com-
ply with the code requirements.
2613.3 Surface-burning characteristics. Reflective plastic
core insulation shall have a flame spread index of not more than
25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when
tested in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723. The reflec-
tive plastic core insulation shall be tested at the maximum
thickness intended for use and shall be tested using one of the
mounting methods in Section 2613.3.1 or 2613.3.2.
2613.3.1 Mounting of test specimen. The test specimen
shall be mounted on 2-inch-high (51 mm) metal frames so
as to create an air space between the unexposed face of the
reflective plastic core insulation and the lid of the test appa-
ratus.
2613.3.2 Specific testing. A set of specimen preparation
and mounting procedures shall be used which are specific to
the testing of reflective plastic core insulation.
2613.4 Room corner test heat release. Reflective plastic core
insulation shall comply with the acceptance criteria of Section
803.1.2.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286 or UL
1715 in the manner intended for use and at the maximum thick-
ness intended for use.

544

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

26_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:22)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:16:35 AM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 27

ELECTRICAL

SECTION 2701
GENERAL

2701.1 Scope. This chapter governs the electrical components,
equipment and systems used in buildings and structures cov-
ered by this code. Electrical components, equipment and sys-
tems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
provisions of NFPA 70.

[F] SECTION 2702
EMERGENCY AND STANDBY POWER SYSTEMS

[F] 2702.1 Installation. Emergency and standby power sys-
tems required by this code or the International Fire Code shall
be installed in accordance with this code, NFPA 110 and 111.
[F] 2702.1.1 Stationary generators. Stationary emergency
and standby power generators required by this code shall be
listed in accordance with UL 2200.
[F] 2702.2 Where required. Emergency and standby power
systems shall be provided where required by Sections 2702.2.1
through 2702.2.20.
[F] 2702.2.1 Group A occupancies. Emergency power
shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communica-
tion systems in Group A occupancies in accordance with
Section 907.5.2.2.4 .
[F] 2702.2.2 Smoke control systems. Standby power shall
be provided for smoke control systems in accordance with
Section 909.11.
[F] 2702.2.3 Exit signs. Emergency power shall be pro-
vided for exit signs in accordance with Section 1011.5.3.
[F] 2702.2.4 Means of egress illumination. Emergency
power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in
accordance with Section 1006.3.
[F] 2702.2.5 Accessible means of egress elevators.
Standby power shall be provided for elevators that are part
of an accessible means of egress in accordance with Section
1007.4.
[F] 2702.2.6 Accessible means of egress platform lifts.
Standby power in accordance with this section or ASME A
18.1 shall be provided for platform lifts that are part of an
accessible means of egress in accordance with Section
1007.5.
[F] 2702.2.7 Horizontal sliding doors. Standby power
shall be provided for horizontal sliding doors in accordance
with Section 1008.1.4.3.
[F] 2702.2.8 Semiconductor fabrication facilities. Emer-
gency power shall be provided for semiconductor fabrica-
tion facilities in accordance with Section 415.8.10.

[F] 2702.2.9 Membrane structures. Standby power shall
be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in accordance
with Section 3102.8.2. Emergency power shall be provided
for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in
accordance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 2702.2.10 Hazardous materials. Emergency or stand-
by power shall be provided in occupancies with hazardous
materials in accordance with Section 414.5.4.

[F] 2702.2.11 Highly toxic and toxic materials. Emer-
gency power shall be provided for occupancies with highly
toxic or toxic materials in accordance with the International
Fire Code.

[F] 2702.2.12 Organic peroxides. Standby power shall be
provided for occupancies with silane gas in accordance with
the International Fire Code.

[F] 2702.2.13 Pyrophoric materials. Emergency power
shall be provided for occupancies with silane gas in accor-
dance with the International Fire Code.

[F] 2702.2.14 Covered mall buildings. Standby power
shall be provided for voice/alarm communication systems
in covered mall buildings in accordance with Section
402.14.

[F] 2702.2.15 High-rise buildings. Emergency and stand-
by power shall be provided in high-rise buildings in accor-
dance with Sections 403.4.7 and 403.4.8.

[F] 2702.2.16 Underground buildings. Emergency and
standby power shall be provided in underground buildings
in accordance with Sections 405.8 and 405.9.

[F] 2702.2.17 Group I-3 occupancies. Emergency power
shall be provided for doors in Group I-3 occupancies in
accordance with Section 408.4.2.

[F] 2702.2.18 Airport traffic control towers. Standby
power shall be provided in airport traffic control towers in
accordance with Section 412.3.5.

[F] 2702.2.19 Elevators. Standby power for elevators shall
be provided as set forth in Sections 3003.1, 3007.7 and
3008.15.

[F] 2702.2.20 Smokeproof enclosures. Standby power
shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures as required by
Section 909.20.6.2.

[F] 2702.3 Maintenance. Emergency and standby power sys-
tems shall be maintained and tested in accordance with the
International Fire Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

545

27_ibc_2009pg545.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:23)_ibc_2009.vp
Monday, March 09, 2009 9:14:27 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

546

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

27_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:23)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:17:13 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 28

MECHANICAL SYSTEMS

SECTION 2801
GENERAL

2801.1 Scope. Mechanical appliances, equipment and systems
shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance
with the International Mechanical Code and the International
Fuel Gas Code. Masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues
shall comply with the International Mechanical Code and
Chapter 21 of this code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

547

28_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:17:51 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

548

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

28_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)8_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:17:51 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 29

PLUMBING SYSTEMS

SECTION 2901
GENERAL

[P] 2901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter and the Inter-
national Plumbing Code shall govern the erection, installation,
alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems. Plumbing
systems and equipment shall be constructed, installed and
maintained in accordance with the International Plumbing
Code. Private sewage disposal systems shall conform to the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code.

SECTION 2902
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES
[P] 2902.1 Minimum number of fixtures. Plumbing fixtures
shall be provided for the type of occupancy and in the mini-
mum number shown in Table 2902.1. Types of occupancies not
shown in Table 2902.1 shall be considered individually by the
building official. The number of occupants shall be determined
by this code. Occupancy classification shall be determined in
accordance with Chapter 3.

[P] TABLE 2902.1
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa
(See Sections 2902.2 and 2902.3)

WATER CLOSETS
(URINALS SEE SECTION 419.2 OF
THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING
CODE)

LAVATORIES

No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY

DESCRIPTION

MALE

FEMALE

MALE

FEMALE

DRINKING
FOUNTAINSe, f
(SEE SECTION
410.1 OF THE
INTERNATIONAL
PLUMBINGCODE) OTHER

BATHTUBS/
SHOWERS

A-1d

A-2d

1 Assembly

A-3d

A-4

A-5

Theaters and other
buildings for the
performing arts and
motion pictures

Nightclubs, bars,
taverns, dance halls and
buildings for similar
purposes

Restaurants, banquet
halls and food courts

Auditoriums without
permanent seating, art
galleries, exhibition
halls, museums, lecture
halls, libraries, arcades
and gymnasiums

Passenger terminals and
transportation facilities

Places of worship and
other religious services

Coliseums, arenas,
skating rinks, pools and
tennis courts for indoor
sporting events and
activities

Stadiums, amusement
parks, bleachers and
grandstands for outdoor
sporting events and
activities

1 per 125

1 per 65

1 per 200

1 per 40

1 per 40

1 per 75

1 per 75

1 per 75

1 per 200

—

—

—

1 per 500

1 per 500

1 per 500

1 per 125

1 per 65

1 per 200

—

1 per 500

1 per 500

1 per 500

1 per 750

1 per 150

1 per 75

1 per 200

—

—

1 per 1,000

1 per 1,000

1 per 75 for the
first 1,500 and
1 per 120 for
the remainder
exceeding
1,500

1 per 40 for the
first 1,520 and
1 per 60 for the
remainder
exceeding
1,520

1 per 75 for the
first 1,500 and
1 per 120 for
the remainder
exceeding
1,500

1 per 40 for the
first 1,520 and
1 per 60 for the
remainder
exceeding
1,520

(continued)

1 per 200 1 per 150

—

1 per 1,000

1 per 200 1 per 150

—

1 per 1,000

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

29_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:18:29 AM

1

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

1
service
sink

549

550

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

PLUMBING SYSTEMS

[P] TABLE 2902.1—continued
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa

No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY

DESCRIPTION

WATER CLOSETS
(URINALS SEE SECTION 419.2 OF
THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING
CODE)

LAVATORIES

BATHTUBS
OR
SHOWERS

DRINKING
FOUNTAINSe, f
(SEE SECTION
410.1 OF THE
INTERNATIONAL
PLUMBINGCODE)

OTHER

MALE

FEMALE

MALE

FEMALE

2 Business

B

Buildings for the
transaction of
business, professional
services, other
services involving
merchandise, office
buildings, banks,
light industrial and
similar uses

1 per 25 for the first 50 and 1
per 50 for the remainder
exceeding 50

1 per 40 for the first
80 and 1 per 80 for
the remainder
exceeding 80

—

1 per 100

1 service
sink

3 Educational

E

Educational facilities

1 per 50

1 per 50

—

1 per 100

1 service
sink

4 Factory and
industrial

F-1 and F-2

Structures in which
occupants are
engaged in work
fabricating, assembly
or processing of
products or materials

1 per 100

1 per 100

See Section
411 of the
International
Plumbing
Code

1 per 400

1 service
sink

5 Institutional

I-1

Residential care

1 per 10

1 per 10

1 per 8

1 per 100

1 service
sink

I-2

Hospitals,
ambulatory nursing
home patientsb

1 per per roomc

1 per per roomc

1 per 15

1 per 100

1 service
sink

Employees, other
than residential careb

1 per 25

1 per 35

—

1 per 100

—

Visitors, other than
residential care

1 per 75

1 per 100

—

1 per 500

—

I-3

Prisonsb

1 per cell

1 per cell

1 per 15

1 per 100

1 service
sink

I-3

Reformatories,
detention centers and
correctional centersb

1 per 15

1 per 15

1 per 15

1 per 100

1 service
sink

Employeesb

1 per 25

1 per 35

—

1 per 100

—

I-4

Adult day care and
child care

1 per 15

1 per 15

1

1 per 100

1 service
sink

6 Mercantile

M

Retail stores, service
stations, shops,
salesrooms, markets
and shopping centers

1 per 500

1 per 750

—

1 per 1,000

1 service
sink

7 Residential

R-1

Hotels, motels,
boarding houses
(transient)

1 per sleeping unit

1 per sleeping unit 1 per sleeping
unit

—

1 service
sink

R-2

Dormitories,
fraternities, sororities
and boarding houses
(not transient)

1 per 10

1 per 10

1 per 8

1 per 100

1 service
sink

R-2

Apartment house

1 per dwelling unit

1 per dwelling unit

1 per
dwelling unit

—

1 kitchen
sink per
dwelling
unit; 1
automatic
clothes
washer
connection
per 20
dwelling
units

(continued)

2

29_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:18:29 AM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLUMBING SYSTEMS

[P] TABLE 2902.1—continued
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa

WATER CLOSETS
(URINALS SEE SECTION 419.2 OF
THE INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING
CODE)

LAVATORIES

No. CLASSIFICATION OCCUPANCY

DESCRIPTION

MALE

FEMALE

MALE

FEMALE

DRINKING
FOUNTAINSe, f
(SEE SECTION
410.1 OF THE
INTERNATIONAL
PLUMBINGCODE)

BATHTUBS/
SHOWERS

7 Residential

8

Storage

R-3

R-4

S-1
S-2

Congregate living
facilities with 16 or
fewer persons

Residential
care/assisted living
facilities

Structures for the
storage of goods,
warehouses,
storehouses and
freight depots, low
and moderate hazard

1 per 10

1 per 10

1 per 8

1 per 100

1 per 10

1 per 10

1 per 8

1 per 100

1 per 100

1 per 100

See Section
411 of the
International
Plumbing
Code

1 per 1,000

1 service
sink

OTHER

1 service
sink

1 service
sink

a. The fixtures shown are based on one fixture being the minimum required for the number of persons indicated or any fraction of the number of persons indicated.
The number of occupants shall be determined by this code.
b. Toilet facilities for employees shall be separate from facilities for inmates or patients.
c. A single-occupant toilet room with one water closet and one lavatory serving not more than two adjacent patient sleeping units shall be permitted where such room
is provided with direct access from each patient sleeping unit and with provisions for privacy.
d. The occupant load for seasonal outdoor seating and entertainment areas shall be included when determining the minimum number of facilities required.
e. The minimum number of required drinking fountains shall comply with Table 2902.1 and Chapter 11.
f. Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of 15 or fewer.

[P] 2902.1.1 Fixture calculations. To determine the occu-
pant load of each sex, the total occupant load shall be
divided in half. To determine the required number of fix-
tures, the fixture ratio or ratios for each fixture type shall be
applied to the occupant load of each sex in accordance with
Table 2902.1. Fractional numbers resulting from applying
the fixture ratios of Table 2902.1 shall be rounded up to the
next whole number. For calculations involving multiple
occupancies, such fractional numbers for each occupancy
shall first be summed and then rounded up to the next whole
number.

Exception: The total occupant load shall not be required
to be divided in half where approved statistical data indi-
cate a distribution of the sexes of other than 50 percent of
each sex.

2902.1.2 Family or assisted use toilet and bath fixtures.
Fixtures located within family or assisted use toilet and
bathing rooms required by Section 1109.2.1 are permitted
to be included in the number of required fixtures for either
the male or female occupants in assembly and mercantile
occupancies.

[P] 2902.2 Separate facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are
required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.

Exceptions:
1. Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling
units and sleeping units.
2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures
or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including
both employees and customers, of 15 or less.
3. Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile
occupancies in which the maximum occupant load is
50 or less.

➡

[P] 2902.3 Required public toilet facilities. Customers,
patrons and visitors shall be provided with public toilet facili-
ties in structures and tenant spaces intended for public utiliza-
tion. The number of plumbing fixtures located within the
required toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance with
Section 2902.1 for all users. Employees shall be provided with
toilet facilities in all occupancies. Employee toilet facilities
shall either be separate or combined employee and public toilet
facilities.
[P] 2902.3.1 Access. The route to the public toilet facilities
required by Section 2902.3 shall not pass through kitchens,
storage rooms or closets. Access to the required facilities
shall be from within the building or from the exterior of the
building. All routes shall comply with the accessibility
requirements of this code. The public shall have access to
the required toilet facilities at all times that the building is
occupied.
[P] 2902.3.2 Location of toilet facilities in occupancies
other than covered mall buildings. In occupancies other
than covered mall buildings,
the required public and
employee toilet facilities shall be located not more than one
story above or below the space required to be provided with
toilet facilities and the path of travel to such facilities shall
not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 400 mm).
Exception: The location and maximum travel distances
to required employee facilities in factory and industrial
occupancies are permitted to exceed that required by this
section, provided that the location and maximum travel
distance are approved.
[P] 2902.3.3 Location of toilet facilities in covered mall
buildings. In covered mall buildings, the required public
and employee toilet facilities shall be located not more than
one story above or below the space required to be provided
with toilet facilities, and the path of travel to such facilities

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

551

29_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:18:29 AM

3

2. Toilet rooms located in day care and child care facili-
ties and containing two or more urinals shall be per-
mitted to have one urinal without partitions.
[P] 2903.3 Interior Finish. Interior finish surfaces of toilet
rooms shall comply with Section 1210.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

PLUMBING SYSTEMS

shall not exceed a distance of 300 feet (91 440 mm). In cov-
ered mall buildings, the required facilities shall be based on
total square footage, and facilities shall be installed in each
individual store or in a central toilet area located in accor-
dance with this section. The maximum travel distance to the
central toilet facilities in covered mall buildings shall be
measured from the main entrance of any store or tenant
space. In covered mall buildings, where employees’ toilet
facilities are not provided in the individual store, the maxi-
mum travel distance shall be measured from the employees’
work area of the store or tenant space.
[P] 2902.3.4 Pay facilities. Where pay facilities are
installed, such facilities shall be in excess of the required
minimum facilities. Required facilities shall be free of
charge.
[P] 2902.4 Signage. A legible sign designating the sex shall be
provided in a readily visible location near the entrance to each
toilet facility. Signs for accessible toilet facilities shall comply
with ICC A117.1.
2902.4.1 Directional signage. Directional signage indicat-
ing the route to the public facilities shall be posted in accor-
dance with Section 3107. Such signage shall be located in a
corridor or aisle, at the entrance to the facilities for custom-
ers and visitors.

SECTION 2903
TOILET ROOM REQUIREMENTS
[P] 2903.1 Water closet compartment. Each water closet uti-
lized by the public or employees shall occupy a separate com-
partment with walls or partitions and a door enclosing the
fixtures to ensure privacy.
Exceptions:
1. Water closet compartments shall not be required in a
single-occupant toilet room with a lockable door.
2. Toilet rooms located in day care and child care facili-
ties and containing two or more water closets shall be
permitted to have one water closet without an enclos-
ing compartment.
3. This provision is not applicable to toilet areas located
within Group I-3 housing areas.
[P] 2903.2 Urinal partitions. Each urinal utilized by the pub-
lic or employees shall occupy a separate area with walls or par-
titions to provide privacy. The walls or partitions shall begin at
a height not more than 12 inches (305 mm) from and extend not
less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the finished floor surface.
The walls or partitions shall extend from the wall surface at
each side of the urinal a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) or to a
point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the outermost
front lip of the urinal measured from the finished back wall sur-
face, whichever is greater.
Exceptions:
1. Urinal partitions shall not be required in a single occu-
pant or family or assisted use toilet room with a
lockable door.

552

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

29_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:2)9_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:18:30 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 30

ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS

SECTION 3001
GENERAL

3001.1 Scope. This chapter governs the design, construction,
installation, alteration and repair of elevators and conveying
systems and their components.
3001.2 Referenced standards. Except as otherwise provided
for in this code, the design, construction, installation, alter-
ation, repair and maintenance of elevators and conveying sys-
t em s a n d t h e i r c om p o n e n t s s h a l l c o n f o rm t o A SME
A17.1/CSA B44, ASME A90.1, ASME B20.1, ALI ALCTV,
and ASCE 24 for construction in flood hazard areas established
in Section 1612.3.
3001.3 Accessibility. Passenger elevators required to be acces-
sible by Chapter 11 shall conform to ICC A117.1.
3001.4 Change in use. A change in use of an elevator from
freight to passenger, passenger to freight, or from one freight
class to another freight class shall comply with Section 8.7 of
ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

SECTION 3002
HOISTWAY ENCLOSURES
3002.1 Hoistway enclosure protection. Elevator, dumbwaiter
and other hoistway enclosures shall be shaft enclosures com-
plying with Section 708.
3002.1.1 Opening protectives. Openings in hoistway
enclosures shall be protected as required in Chapter 7.
Exception: The elevator car doors and the associated
hoistway enclosure doors at the floor level designated for
recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be permit-
ted to remain open during Phase I Emergency Recall
Operation.
3002.1.2 Hardware. Hardware on opening protectives
shall be of an approved type installed as tested, except that
approved interlocks, mechanical locks and electric con-
tacts, door and gate electric contacts and door-operating
mechanisms shall be exempt from the fire test requirements.
3002.2 Number of elevator cars in a hoistway. Where four or
more elevator cars serve all or the same portion of a building,
the elevators shall be located in at least two separate hoistways.
Not more than four elevator cars shall be located in any single
hoistway enclosure.
3002.3 Emergency signs. An approved pictorial sign of a stan-
dardized design shall be posted adjacent to each elevator call
station on all floors instructing occupants to use the exit stair-
ways and not to use the elevators in case of fire. The sign shall

read: IN FIRE EMERGENCY, DO NOT USE ELEVATOR.
USE EXIT STAIRS.
Exceptions:
1. The emergency sign shall not be required for elevators
that are part of an accessible means of egress complying
with Section 1007.4.
2. The emergency sign shall not be required for elevators
that are used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance
with Section 3008.
3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher.
Where elevators are provided in buildings four or more stories
above, or four or more stories below, grade plane, at least one
elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency
access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and
arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24
inches by 84 inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than
5-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open posi-
tion and shall be identified by the international symbol for
emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not
be less than 3 inches (76 mm) high and shall be placed inside on
both sides of the hoistway door frame.
3002.5 Emergency doors. Where an elevator is installed in a
single blind hoistway or on the outside of a building, there shall
be installed in the blind portion of the hoistway or blank face of
the building, an emergency door in accordance with ASME
A17.1/CSA B44.
3002.6 Prohibited doors. Doors, other than hoistway doors
and the elevator car door, shall be prohibited at the point of
access to an elevator car unless such doors are readily openable
from the car side without a key, tool, special knowledge or
effort.
3002.7 Common enclosure with stairway. Elevators shall not
be in a common shaft enclosure with a stairway.
Exception: Open parking garages.

3002.8 Glass in elevator enclosures. Glass in elevator enclo-
sures shall comply with Section 2409.1.

[F] SECTION 3003
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS

[F] 3003.1 Standby power. In buildings and structures where
standby power is required or furnished to operate an elevator,
the operation shall be in accordance with Sections 3003.1.1
through 3003.1.4.
[F] 3003.1.1 Manual transfer. Standby power shall be
manually transferable to all elevators in each bank.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

553

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:11 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS

[F] 3003.1.2 One elevator. Where only one elevator is
installed, the elevator shall automatically transfer to standby
power within 60 seconds after failure of normal power.
[F] 3003.1.3 Two or more elevators. Where two or more
elevators are controlled by a common operating system, all
elevators shall automatically transfer to standby power
within 60 seconds after failure of normal power where the
standby power source is of sufficient capacity to operate all
elevators at the same time. Where the standby power source
is not of sufficient capacity to operate all elevators at the
same time, all elevators shall transfer to standby power in
sequence, return to the designated landing and disconnect
from the standby power source. After all elevators have
been returned to the designated level, at least one elevator
shall remain operable from the standby power source.
[F] 3003.1.4 Venting. Where standby power is connected to
elevators, the machine room ventilation or air conditioning
shall be connected to the standby power source.
[F] 3003.2 Fire-fighters’ emergency operation. Elevators
shall be provided with Phase I emergency recall operation and
Phase II emergency in-car operation in accordance with ASME
A17.1/CSA B44.

SECTION 3004
HOISTWAY VENTING

3004.1 Vents required. Hoistways of elevators and dumbwait-
ers penetrating more than three stories shall be provided with a
means for venting smoke and hot gases to the outer air in case
of fire.
Exceptions:
1. In occupancies of other than Groups R-1, R-2, I-1, I-2
and similar occupancies with overnight sleeping
units, venting of hoistways is not required where the
building is equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
2. Sidewalk elevator hoistways are not required to be
vented.
3. Elevators contained within and serving open parking
garages only.
4. Elevators within individual residential dwelling units.
3004.2 Location of vents. Vents shall be located at the top the
hoistway and shall open either directly to the outer air or
through noncombustible ducts to the outer air. Noncombustible
ducts shall be permitted to pass through the elevator machine
room, provided that portions of the ducts located outside the
hoistway or machine room are enclosed by construction having
not less than the fire-resistance rating required for the
hoistway. Holes in the machine room floors for the passage of
ropes, cables or other moving elevator equipment shall be lim-
ited as not to provide greater than 2 inches (51 mm) of clear-
ance on all sides.
3004.3 Area of vents. Except as provided for in Section
3004.3.1, the area of the vents shall not be less than 31/2 percent

of the area of the hoistway nor less than 3 square feet (0.28 m2)
for each elevator car, and not less than 31/2 percent nor less than
0.5 square feet (0.047 m2) for each dumbwaiter car in the
hoistway, whichever is greater. Of the total required vent area,
not less than one-third shall be permanently open. Closed por-
tions of the required vent area shall consist of openings glazed
with annealed glass not greater than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) in thick-
ness.
Exception: The total required vent area shall not be
required to be permanently open where all the vent openings
automatically open upon detection of smoke in the elevator
lobbies or hoistway, upon power failure and upon activation
of a manual override control. The manual override control
shall be capable of opening and closing the vents and shall
be located in an approved location.
3004.3.1 Reduced vent area. Where mechanical ventila-

tion conforming to the International Mechanical Code is
provided, a reduction in the required vent area is allowed
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The occupancy is not in Group R-1, R-2, I-1 or I-2 or
of a similar occupancy with overnight sleeping units.
2. The vents required by Section 3004.2 do not have out-
side exposure.
3. The hoistway does not extend to the top of the build-
ing.
4. The hoistway and machine room exhaust fan is auto-
matically reactivated by thermostatic means.
5. Equivalent venting of the hoistway is accomplished.
3004.4 Plumbing and mechanical systems. Plumbing and
mechanical systems shall not be located in an elevator shaft.
Exception: Floor drains, sumps and sump pumps shall be
permitted at the base of the shaft provided they are indirectly
connected to the plumbing system.

SECTION 3005
CONVEYING SYSTEMS

3005.1 General. Escalators, moving walks, conveyors, per-
sonnel hoists and material hoists shall comply with the provi-
sions of this section.
3005.2 Escalators and moving walks. Escalators and moving
walks shall be constructed of approved noncombustible and
fire-retardant materials. This requirement shall not apply to
electrical equipment, wiring, wheels, handrails and the use of
1/28-inch (0.9 mm) wood veneers on balustrades backed up with
noncombustible materials.
3005.2.1 Enclosure. Escalator floor openings shall be
enclosed with shaft enclosures complying with Section 708.
3005.2.2 Escalators. Where provided in below-grade trans-
portation stations, escalators shall have a clear width of 32
inches (815 mm) minimum.
Exception: The clear width is not required in existing
facilities undergoing alterations.

554

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:11 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3005.3 Conveyors. Conveyors and conveying systems shall
comply with ASME B20.1.
3005.3.1 Enclosure. Conveyors and related equipment con-
necting successive floors or levels shall be enclosed with
shaft enclosures complying with Section 708.
3005.3.2 Conveyor safeties. Power-operated conveyors,
belts and other material-moving devices shall be equipped
with automatic limit switches which will shut off the power
in an emergency and automatically stop all operation of the
device.
3005.4 Personnel and material hoists. Personnel and mate-
rial hoists shall be designed utilizing an approved method that
accounts for the conditions imposed during the intended opera-
tion of the hoist device. The design shall include, but is not lim-
ited to, anticipated loads, structural stability, impact, vibration,
stresses and seismic restraint. The design shall account for the
construction, installation, operation and inspection of the hoist
tower, car, machinery and control equipment, guide members
and hoisting mechanism. Additionally, the design of personnel
hoists shall include provisions for field testing and mainte-
nance which will demonstrate that the hoist device functions in
accordance with the design. Field tests shall be conducted upon
the completion of an installation or following a major alter-
ation of a personnel hoist.

SECTION 3006
MACHINE ROOMS

3006.1 Access. An approved means of access shall be provided
to elevator machine rooms and overhead machinery spaces.
3006 .2 Ven t ing. E leva to r mach ine rooms tha t con ta in
solid-state equipment for elevator operation shall be provided
with an independent ventilation or air-conditioning system to
protect against the overheating of the electrical equipment. The
system shall be capable of maintaining temperatures within the
range established for the elevator equipment.
3006.3 Pressurization. The elevator machine room serving a
pressurized elevator hoistway shall be pressurized upon activa-
tion of a heat or smoke detector located in the elevator machine
room.
3006.4 Machine rooms and machinery spaces. Elevator
machine rooms and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with
fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section
712, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall not be less than the
required rating of the hoistway enclosure served by the
machinery. Openings in the fire barriers shall be protected with
assemblies having a fire protection rating not less than that
required for the hoistway enclosure doors.
Exceptions:
1. Where machine rooms and machinery spaces do not
abut and have no openings to the hoistway enclosure
they serve the fire barriers constructed in accordance
with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both, shall
be permitted to be reduced to a 1-hour fire-resistance
rating.

ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS

2. In buildings four stories or less above grade plane
when machine room and machinery spaces do not
abut and have no openings to the hoistway enclosure
they serve, the machine room and machinery spaces
are not required to be fire-resistance rated.
3006.5 Shunt trip. Where elevator hoistways or elevator
machine rooms containing elevator control equipment are pro-
tected with automatic sprinklers, a means installed in accor-
dance with NFPA 72, Section 6.16.4, Elevator Shutdown, shall
be provided to disconnect automatically the main line power
supply to the affected elevator prior to the application of water.
This means shall not be self-resetting. The activation of sprin-
klers outside the hoistway or machine room shall not discon-
nect the main line power supply.
3006.6 Plumbing systems. Plumbing systems shall not be
located in elevator equipment rooms.

SECTION 3007
FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATOR

3007.1 General. Where required by Section 403.6.1, every
floor of the building shall be served by a fire service access ele-
vator. Except as modified in this section, the fire service access
elevator shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and
ASME A17.1/CSA B44.
3007.2 Hoistway enclosures protection. The fire service
access elevator shall be located in a shaft enclosure complying
with Section 708.
3007.3 Hoistway lighting. When firefighters’ emergency
operation is active, the entire height of the hoistway shall be
illuminated at not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) as measured
from the top of the car of each fire service access elevator.
3007.4 Fire service access elevator lobby. The fire service
access elevator shall open into a fire service access elevator
lobby in accordance with Sections 3007.4.1 through 3007.4.4.
Exception: Where a fire service access elevator has two
entrances onto a floor, the second entrance shall be permit-
ted to open into an elevator lobby in accordance with Sec-
tion 708.14.1.
3007.4.1 Access. The fire service access elevator lobby
shall have direct access to an exit enclosure.
3007.4.2 Lobby enclosure. The fire service access elevator
lobby shall be enclosed with a smoke barrier having a mini-
mum 1-hour fire-resistance rating, except that lobby door-
ways shall comply with Section 3007.4.3.
Exception: Enclosed fire service access elevator lobbies
are not required at the street floor.
3007.4.3 Lobby doorways. Each fire service access eleva-
tor lobby shall be provided with a doorway that is protected
with a 3/4-hour fire door assembly complying with Section
715.4. The fire door assembly shall also comply with the
smoke and draft control door assembly requirements of
Section 715.4.3.1 with the UL 1784 test conducted without
the artificial bottom seat.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

555

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:12 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS

3007.4.4 Lobby size. Each enclosed fire service access ele-
vator lobby shall be a minimum of 150 square feet (14 m2) in
an area with a minimum dimension of 8 feet (2440 mm).
3007.5 Standpipe hose connection. A Class I standpipe hose
connection in accordance with Section 905 shall be provided in
the exit enclosure having direct access from the fire service
access elevator lobby.
3007.6 Elevator system monitoring. The fire service access
elevator shall be continuously monitored at the fire command
center by a standard emergency service interface system meet-
ing the requirements of NFPA 72.
3007.7 Electrical power. The following features serving each
fire service access elevator shall be supplied by both normal
power and Type 60/Class 2/Level 1 standby power:
1. Elevator equipment.
2. Elevator hoistway lighting.
3. Elevator machine room ventilation and cooling equip-
ment.
4. Elevator controller cooling equipment.
3007.7.1 Protection of wiring or cables. Wires or cables
that provide normal and standby power, control signals,
communication with the car, lighting, heating, air condi-
tioning, ventilation and fire-detecting systems to fire service
access elevators shall be protected by construction having a
minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating or shall be circuit
integrity cable having a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance
rating.

SECTION 3008
OCCUPANT EVACUATION ELEVATORS

3008.1 General. Where elevators are to be used for occupant
self-evacuation during fires, all passenger elevators for general
public use shall comply with this section. Where other eleva-
tors are used for occupant self-evacuation, they shall also com-
ply with this section.
3008.2 Fire safety and evacuation plan. The building shall
have an approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance
with the applicable requirements of Section 404 of the Interna-
tional Fire Code. The fire safety and evacuation plan shall
incorporate specific procedures for the occupants using evacu-
ation elevators.
3008.3 Operation. The occupant evacuation elevators shall be
used for occupant self-evacuation only in the normal elevator
operating mode prior to Phase I Emergency Recall Operation
in accordance with the requirements in ASME A17.1/CSA
B44 and the building’s fire safety and evacuation plan.
3008.4 Additional exit stairway. Where an additional means
of egress is required in accordance with Section 403.5.2, an
additional exit stairway shall not be required to be installed in
buildings having elevators used for occupant self-evacuation in
accordance with this section.

3008.5 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.
The building shall be provided with an emergency voice/alarm
communication system. The emergency voice/alarm commu-
nication system shall be accessible to the fire department. The
system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.
3008.5.1 Notification appliances. A minimum of one audi-
ble and one visible notification appliance shall be installed
within each occupant evacuation elevator lobby.
3008.6 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be
protected throughout by an approved, electrically-supervised
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
9 0 3 . 3 . 1 . 1 , ex c e p t a s o t h e rw i s e p e rm i t t e d b y S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3008.6.1.
3008.6.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall
not be installed in elevator machine rooms and elevator
machine spaces for occupant evacuation elevators.
3008.6.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler sys-
tem shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch
and waterflow-initiating device provided for each floor that
is monitored by the building’s fire alarm system.
3008.7 High-hazard content areas. No building areas shall
contain high-hazard contents exceeding the maximum allow-
able quantities per control area as addressed in Section 414.2.
3008.8 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance
with Section 3006.5 shall not be installed on elevator systems
used for occupant evacuation elevators.
3008.9 Hoistway enclosure protection. The occupant evacua-
tion elevators shall be located in hoistway enclosure(s) com-
plying with Section 708.
3008.10 Water protection. The occupant evacuation elevator
hoistway shall be designed utilizing an approved method to
prevent water from the operation of the automatic sprinkler
system from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure.
3008.11 Occupant evacuation elevator lobby. The occupant
evacuation elevators shall open into an elevator lobby in accor-
dance with Sections 3008.11.1 through 3008.11.4.
3008.11.1 Access. The occupant evacuation elevator lobby
shall have direct access to an exit enclosure.
3008.11.2 Lobby enclosure. The occupant evacuation ele-
vator lobby shall be enclosed with a smoke barrier having a
minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating, except that lobby
doorways shall comply with Section 3008.11.5.
Exception: Enclosed occupant evacuation elevator lob-
bies are not required at the level(s) of exit discharge.
3008.11.3 Lobby doorways. Each occupant evacuation
elevator lobby shall be provided with a doorway that is pro-
tected with a 3/4-hour fire door assembly complying with
Section 715.4.
3008.11.3.1 Vision panel. A vision panel shall be
installed in each fire door assembly protecting the lobby
doorway. The vision panel shall consist of fire-protec-
tion-rated glazing and shall be located to furnish clear
vision of the occupant evacuation elevator lobby.

556

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:12 AM

4

ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS

department and arranged to display all of the following infor-
mation:
1. Floor location of each elevator car.
2. Direction of travel of each elevator car.
3. Status of each elevator car with respect to whether it is
occupied.
4. Status of normal power to the elevator equipment, eleva-
tor controller cooling equipment, and elevator machine
room ventilation and cooling equipment.
5. Status of standby or emergency power system that pro-
vides backup power to the elevator equipment, elevator
controller cooling equipment, and elevator machine
room ventilation and cooling equipment.
6. Activation of any fire alarm-initiating device in any ele-
vator lobby, elevator machine room or machine space, or
elevator hoistway.
3008.14.1 Elevator recall. The fire command center or an
alternative location approved by the fire department shall be
provided with the means to manually initiate a Phase I
Emergency Recall of the occupant evacuation elevators in
accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.
3008.15 Electrical power. The following features serving
each occupant evacuation elevator shall be supplied by both
normal power and Type 60/Class 2/Level 1 standby power:
1. Elevator equipment.
2. Elevator machine room ventilation and cooling equip-
ment.
3. Elevator controller cooling equipment.
3008.15.1 Protection of wiring or cables. Wires or cables
that provide normal and standby power, control signals,
communication with the car, lighting, heating, air condi-
tioning, ventilation and fire-detecting systems to occupant
evacuation elevators shall be protected by construction hav-
ing a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating or shall be cir-
cuit
integrity cable having a minimum 1-hour
fire-
resistance rating.

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3008.11.3.2 Door closing. Each fire door assembly pro-
tecting the lobby doorway shall be automatic-closing
upon receipt of any fire alarm signal from the emergency
voice/alarm communication system serving the build-
ing.
3008.11.4 Lobby size. Each occupant evacuation elevator
lobby shall have minimum floor area as follows:
1. The occupant evacuation elevator lobby floor area
shall accommodate, at 3 square feet (0.28 m2) per per-
son, a minimum of 25 percent of the occupant load of
the floor area served by the lobby.
2. The occupant evacuation elevator lobby floor area
also shall accommodate one wheelchair space of 30
inches by 48 inches (760 mm by 1220 mm) for each
50 persons, or portion thereof, of the occupant load of
the floor area served by the lobby.
Exception: The size of lobbies serving multiple
banks of elevators shall have the minimum floor
area approved on an individual basis and shall be
consistent with the building’s fire safety and evac-
uation plan.
3008.11.5 Signage. An approved sign indicating elevators
are suitable for occupant self-evacuation shall be posted on
all floors adjacent to each elevator call station serving occu-
pant evacuation elevators.
3008.12 Lobby status indicator. Each occupant evacuation
elevator lobby shall be equipped with a status indicator
arranged to display all of the following information:
1. An illuminated green light and the message, “Elevators
available for occupant evacuation” when the elevators
are operating in normal service and the fire alarm system
is indicating an alarm in the building.
2. An illuminated red light and the message, “Elevators out
of service, use exit stairs” when the elevators are in
Phase I emergency recall operation in accordance with
the requirements in ASME A17.1/CSA B44.
3. No illuminated light or message when the elevators are
operating in normal service.
3008.13 Two-way communication system. A two-way com-
munication system shall be provided in each occupant evacua-
tion elevator lobby for the purpose of initiating communication
with the fire command center or an alternative location
approved by the fire department.
3008.13.1 Design and installation. The two-way com-
munication system shall include audible and visible sig-
nals and shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the requirements of ICC A117.1.
3008.13.2 Instructions. Instructions for the use of the
two-way communication system along with the location
of the station shall be permanently located adjacent to
each station. Signage shall comply with the ICC A117.1
requirements for visual characters.
3008.14 Elevator system monitoring. The occupant evacua-
tion elevators shall be continuously monitored at the fire com-
mand center or a central control point approved by the fire

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

557

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:12 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

558

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

30_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:24)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:12 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 31

SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

SECTION 3101
GENERAL

3101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern spe-
cial building construction including membrane structures,
temporary structures, pedestrian walkways and tunnels, auto-
matic vehicular gates, awnings and canopies, marquees, signs,
and towers and antennas.

SECTION 3102
MEMBRANE STRUCTURES

3102.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
air-supported, air-inflated, membrane-covered cable and
membrane-covered frame structures, collectively known as
membrane structures, erected for a period of 180 days or lon-
ger. Those erected for a shorter period of time shall comply
with the International Fire Code. Membrane structures cover-
ing water storage facilities, water clarifiers, water treatment
plants, sewage treatment plants, greenhouses and similar facili-
ties not used for human occupancy are required to meet only
the requirements of Sections 3102.3.1 and 3102.7. Membrane
structures erected on a building, balcony, deck or other struc-
ture for any period of time shall comply with this section.
3102.2 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meanings shown herein.
AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE . A structure that uses
air-pressurized membrane beams, arches or other elements to
enclose space. Occupants of such a structure do not occupy the
pressurized area used to support the structure.
AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE. A building wherein the
shape of the structure is attained by air pressure and occupants
of the structure are within the elevated pressure area. Air-sup-
ported structures are of two basic types:
Double skin. Similar to a single skin, but with an attached
liner that is separated from the outer skin and provides an
airspace which serves for insulation, acoustic, aesthetic or
similar purposes.
Single skin. Where there is only the single outer skin and
the air pressure is directly against that skin.
CABLE-RESTRAINED , AIR-SUPPORTED STRUC-
TURE. A structure in which the uplift is resisted by cables or
webbings which are anchored to either foundations or dead
men. Reinforcing cable or webbing is attached by various
methods to the membrane or is an integral part of the mem-
brane. This is not a cable-supported structure.
MEMBRANE -COVERED CABLE STRUCTURE . A
nonpressurized structure in which a mast and cable system pro-
vides support and tension to the membrane weather barrier and
the membrane imparts stability to the structure.

MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME STRUCTURE . A
nonpressurized building wherein the structure is composed of a
rigid framework to support a tensioned membrane which pro-
vides the weather barrier.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A
membrane structure in which the membrane and all component
parts of the structure are noncombustible.

3102.3 Type of construction. Noncombustible membrane
structures shall be classified as Type IIB construction .
Noncombustible frame or cable-supported structures covered
by an approved membrane in accordance with Section
3102.3.1 shall be classified as Type IIB construction. Heavy
timber frame-supported structures covered by an approved
membrane in accordance with Section 3102.3.1 shall be classi-
fied as Type IV construction. Other membrane structures shall
be classified as Type V construction.

Exception: Plastic less than 30 feet (9144 mm) above any
floor used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general
public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers is
not required to meet the fire propagation performance crite-
ria of NFPA 701.

3102.3.1 Membrane and interior liner material. Mem-
branes and interior liners shall be either noncombustible as
set forth in Section 703.4 or meet the fire propagation per-
formance criteria of NFPA 701 and the manufacturer’s test
protocol.

Exception: Plastic less than 20 mil (0.5 mm) in thickness
used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general
public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers
is not required to meet the fire propagation performance
criteria of NFPA 701.

3102.4 Allowable floor areas. The area of a membrane struc-
ture shall not exceed the limitations set forth in Table 503,
except as provided in Section 506.

3102.5 Maximum height. Membrane structures shall not
exceed one story nor shall such structures exceed the height
limitations in feet set forth in Table 503.

Exception: Noncombustible membrane structures serving
as roofs only.

3102.6 Mixed construction. Membrane structures shall be
permitted to be utilized as specified in this section as a portion
of buildings of other types of construction. Height and area
limits shall be as specified for the type of construction and
occupancy of the building.

3102.6.1 Noncombustible membrane. A noncombustible
membrane shall be permitted for use as the roof or as a sky-
light of any building or atrium of a building of any type of
construction provided it is at least 20 feet (6096 mm) above
any floor, balcony or gallery.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

559

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:51 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

3102.6.1.1 Membrane. A membrane meeting the fire
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 shall be
permitted to be used as the roof or as a skylight on build-
ings of Types IIB, III, IV and V construction, provided it
is at least 20 feet (6096 mm) above any floor, balcony or
gallery.
3102.7 Engineering design. The structure shall be designed
and constructed to sustain dead loads; loads due to tension or
inflation; live loads including wind, snow or flood and seismic
loads and in accordance with Chapter 16.
3102.8 Inflation systems. Air-supported and air-inflated
structures shall be provided with primary and auxiliary infla-
tion systems to meet the minimum requirements of Sections
3102.8.1 through 3102.8.3.
3102.8.1 Equipment requirements. This inflation system
shall consist of one or more blowers and shall include provi-
sions for automatic control to maintain the required infla-
tion pressures. The system shall be so designed as to prevent
overpressurization of the system.
3102.8.1.1 Auxiliary inflation system. In addition to
the primary inflation system, in buildings exceeding
1,500 square feet (140 m2) in area, an auxiliary inflation
system shall be provided with sufficient capacity to
maintain the inflation of the structure in case of primary
system failure. The auxiliary inflation system shall oper-
ate automatically when there is a loss of internal pressure
and when the primary blower system becomes inopera-
tive.
3102.8.1.2 Blower equipment. Blower equipment shall
meet all of the following requirements:
1. Blowers shall be powered by continuous-rated
motors at the maximum power required for any
flow condition as required by the structural design.
2. Blowers shall be provided with inlet screens, belt
guards and other protective devices as required by
the building official to provide protection from
injury.
3. Blowers shall be housed within a weather-protect-
ing structure.
4. Blowers shall be equipped with backdraft check
dampers to minimize air loss when inoperative.
5. Blower inlets shall be located to provide protection
from air contamination. The location of inlets shall
be approved.
3102.8.2 Standby power. Wherever an auxiliary inflation
system is required, an approved standby power-generating
system shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with
a suitable means for automatically starting the generator set
upon failure of the normal electrical service and for auto-
matic transfer and operation of all of the required electrical
functions at full power within 60 seconds of such service
failure. Standby power shall be capable of operating inde-
pendently for a minimum of 4 hours.
3102.8.3 Support provisions. A system capable of sup-
porting the membrane in the event of deflation shall be pro-
vided for in air-supported and air-inflated structures having

an occupant load of 50 or more or where covering a swim-
ming pool regardless of occupant load. The support system
shall be capable of maintaining membrane structures used
as a roof for Type I construction not less than 20 feet (6096
mm) above floor or seating areas. The support system shall
be capable of maintaining other membranes at least 7 feet
(2134 mm) above the floor, seating area or surface of the
water.

SECTION 3103
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES

3103.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to
structures erected for a period of less than 180 days. Tents and
other membrane structures erected for a period of less than 180
days shall comply with the International Fire Code. Those
erected for a longer period of time shall comply with applicable
sections of this code.
3103.1.1 Permit required. Temporary structures that cover
an area in excess of 120 square feet (11.16 m2), including
connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress
or entrance which are used or intended to be used for the
gathering together of 10 or more persons, shall not be
erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without
obtaining a permit from the building official.

3103.2 Construction documents. A permit application and
construction documents shall be submitted for each installation
of a temporary structure. The construction documents shall
include a site plan indicating the location of the temporary
structure and information delineating the means of egress and
the occupant load.
3103.3 Location. Temporary structures shall be located in
accordance with the requirements of Table 602 based on the
fire-resistance rating of the exterior walls for the proposed type
of construction.
3103.4 Means of egress. Temporary structures shall conform
to the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10 and shall
have a maximum exit access travel distance of 100 feet (30 480
mm).

SECTION 3104
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND TUNNELS

3104.1 General. This section shall apply to connections
between buildings such as pedestrian walkways or tunnels,
located at, above or below grade level, that are used as a means
of travel by persons. The pedestrian walkway shall not contrib-
ute to the building area or the number of stories or height of
connected buildings.
3104.2 Separate structures. Connected buildings shall be
considered to be separate structures.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings on the same lot in accordance with Section
503.1.2.
2. For purposes of calculating the number of Type B
units required by Chapter 11, structurally connected

560

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:51 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

buildings and buildings with multiple wings shall be
considered one structure.
3104.3 Construction. The pedestrian walkway shall be of
noncombustible construction.

Exceptions:
1. Combustible construction shall be permitted where
connected buildings are of combustible construction.
2. Fire-retardant-treated wood, in accordance with
Section 603.1, Item 25.3, shall be permitted for the
roof construction of the pedestrian walkway where
connected buildings are a minimum of Type I or II
construction.
3104.4 Contents. Only materials and decorations approved by
the building official shall be located in the pedestrian walkway.

3104.5 Fire barriers between pedestrian walkways and
buildings. Walkways shall be separated from the interior of the
building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in
accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies con-
structed in accordance with Section 712, or both. This protec-
tion shall extend vertically from a point 10 feet (3048 mm)
above the walkway roof surface or the connected building roof
line, whichever is lower, down to a point 10 feet (3048 mm)
below the walkway and horizontally 10 feet (3048 mm) from
each side of the pedestrian walkway. Openings within the
l0-foot (3048 mm) horizontal extension of the protected walls
beyond the walkway shall be equipped with devices providing
a 3/4-hour fire protection rating in accordance with Section 715.
Exception: The walls separating the pedestrian walkway
from a connected building and the openings within the 10-
foot (3048 mm) horizontal extension of the protected walls
beyond the walkway are not required to have a fire-resis-
tance rating by this section where any of the following con-
ditions exist:
1. The distance between the connected buildings is more
than 10 feet (3048 mm). The pedestrian walkway and
connec ted bu i ld ing s , excep t fo r open pa rk ing
garages, are equipped throughout with an automatic
s p r i n k l e r s y s t em i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n
903.3.1.1. The wall is capable of resisting the passage
of smoke or is constructed of a tempered, wired or
laminated glass wall and doors subject to the follow-
ing:
1.1. The wall or glass separating the interior of the
building from the pedestrian walkway shall be
protected by an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the
sprinkler system shall completely wet the en-
tire surface of interior sides of the wall or glass
when actuated;
1.2. The glass shall be in a gasketed frame and in-
stalled in such a manner that the framing sys-
tem will deflect without breaking (loading)
the glass before the sprinkler operates; and
1.3. Obstructions shall not be installed between
the sprinkler heads and the wall or glass.

SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

2. The distance between the connected buildings is more
than 10 feet (3048 mm) and both sidewalls of the
pedestrian walkway are at least 50 percent open with
the open area uniformly distributed to prevent the
accumulation of smoke and toxic gases.
3. Buildings are on the same lot in accordance with Sec-
tion 503.1.2.
4. Where exterior walls of connected buildings are
required by Section 705 to have a fire-resistance rat-
ing greater than 2 hours, the walkway shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
The previous exception shall apply to pedestrian walkways
having a maximum height above grade of three stories or 40
feet (12 192 mm), or five stories or 55 feet (16 764 mm) where
sprinklered.
3104.6 Public way. Pedestrian walkways over a public way
shall also comply with Chapter 32.
3104.7 Egress. Access shall be provided at all times to a pedes-
trian walkway that serves as a required exit.
3104.8 Width. The unobstructed width of pedestrian walk-
ways shall not be less than 36 inches (914 mm). The total width
shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm).
3104.9 Exit access travel. The length of exit access travel shall
not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm).
Exceptions:

1. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler sys-
tem in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall not
exceed 250 feet (76 200 mm).
2. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway
constructed with both sides at least 50 percent open
shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm).
3. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway
constructed with both sides at least 50 percent open,
and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, shall not
exceed 400 feet (122 m).
3104.10 Tunneled walkway. Separation between the tunneled
walkway and the building to which it is connected shall not be
less than 2-hour fire-resistant construction and openings
therein shall be protected in accordance with Table 715.4.

SECTION 3105
AWNINGS AND CANOPIES

3105.1 General. Awnings or canopies shall comply with the
requirements of this section and other applicable sections of
this code.
3105.2 Definition. The following term shall, for the purposes
of this section and as used elsewhere in this code, have the
meaning shown herein.
RETRACTABLE AWNING. A retractable awning is a cover
with a frame that retracts against a building or other structure to
which it is entirely supported.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

561

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:52 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

3105.3 Design and construction. Awnings and canopies shall
be designed and constructed to withstand wind or other lateral
loads and live loads as required by Chapter 16 with due allow-
ance for shape, open construction and similar features that
relieve the pressures or loads. Structural members shall be pro-
tected to prevent deterioration. Awnings shall have frames of
noncombustible material, fire-retardant-treated wood, wood
of Type IV size, or 1-hour construction with combustible or
noncombustible covers and shall be either fixed, retractable,
folding or collapsible.
3105.4 Canopy materials. Canopies shall be constructed of a
rigid framework with an approved covering that meets the fire
propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 or has a flame
spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance
with ASTM E 84 or UL 723.

SECTION 3106
MARQUEES

3106.1 General. Marquees shall comply with this section and
other applicable sections of this code.
3106.2 Thickness. The maximum height or thickness of a mar-
quee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point
shall not exceed 3 feet (914 mm) where the marquee projects
more than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to
the curb line, and shall not exceed 9 feet (2743 mm) where the
marquee is less than two-thirds of the distance from the prop-
erty line to the curb line.
3106.3 Roof construction. Where the roof or any part thereof
is a skylight, the skylight shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 24. Every roof and skylight of a marquee shall be
sloped to downspouts that shall conduct any drainage from the
marquee in such a manner so as not to spill over the sidewalk.
3106.4 Location prohibited. Every marquee shall be so
located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior
standpipe, and such that the marquee does not obstruct the clear
passage of stairways or exit discharge from the building or the
installation or maintenance of street lighting.
3106.5 Construction. A marquee shall be supported entirely
from the building and constructed of noncombustible materi-
als. Marquees shall be designed as required in Chapter 16.
Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration.

SECTION 3107
SIGNS

3107.1 General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with this code.

SECTION 3108
TELECOMMUNICATION AND
BROADCAST TOWERS

3108.1 General. Towers shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of TIA-222.
Exception: Single free-standing poles used to support
antennas not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm), measured

from the top of the pole to grade, shall not be required to be
noncombustible.
3108.2 Location and access. Towers shall be located such that
guy wires and other accessories shall not cross or encroach
upon any street or other public space, or over above-ground
electric utility lines, or encroach upon any privately owned
property without the written consent of the owner of the
encroached-upon property, space or above-ground electric
utility lines. Towers shall be equipped with climbing and work-
ing facilities in compliance with TIA-222. Access to the tower
sites shall be limited as required by applicable OSHA, FCC and
EPA regulations.

➡

SECTION 3109
SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES AND
SAFETY DEVICES

3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the
requirements of this section and other applicable sections of
this code.
3109.2 Definition. The following word and term shall, for the
purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meaning shown herein.
SWIMMING POOLS. Any structure intended for swimming,
recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 24
inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground
and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading
pools.
3109.3 Public swimming pools. Public swimming pools shall
be completely enclosed by a fence at least 4 feet (1290 mm) in
height or a screen enclosure. Openings in the fence shall not
permit the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. The
fence or screen enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing
and self-latching gates.
3109.4 Residential swimming pools. Residential swimming
pools shall comply with Sections 3109.4.1 through 3109.4.3.
Exception: A swimming pool with a power safety cover or
a spa with a safety cover complying with ASTM F 1346.
3109.4.1 Barrier height and clearances. The top of the
barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade
measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the
swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between
grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51
mm) measured on the side of the barrier that faces away
from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool struc-
ture is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground
level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maxi-
mum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure
and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102 mm).
3109.4.1.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not
allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
3109.4.1.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers which
do not have openings shall not contain indentations or
protrusions except for normal construction tolerances
and tooled masonry joints.

562

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:52 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3109 .4 .1 .3 C lose ly spaced hor izon ta l members .
Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the hori-
zontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the
horizontal members shall be located on the swimming
pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical mem-
bers shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical mem-
bers, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4
inches (44 mm) in width.
3109 .4 .1 .4 Wide ly spaced hor izon ta l members .
Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the hori-
zontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing
between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102
mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical
members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4
inches (44 mm) in width.
3109.4.1.5 Chain link dimensions. Maximum mesh
size for chain link fences shall be a 21/4 inch square (57
mm square) unless the fence is provided with slats fas-
tened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings
to no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).
3109.4.1.6 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is
composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening
formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than
13/4 inches (44 mm).
3109.4.1.7 Gates. Access doors or gates shall comply
with the requirements of Sections 3109.4.1.1 through
3109.4.1.6 and shall be equipped to accommodate a
locking device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall
open outward away from the pool and shall be self-clos-
ing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other
than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a
self-latching device. Release mechanisms shall be in
accordance with Sections 1008.1.9 and 1109.12. Where
the release mechanism of the self-latching device is
located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom
of the door or gate, the release mechanism shall be
located on the pool side of the door or gate at least 3
inches (76 mm) below the top of the door or gate, and the
door or gate and barrier shall have no opening greater
than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the
release mechanism.
3109.4.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a
dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following
shall apply:
1. Doors with direct access to the pool through that
wall shall be equipped with an alarm that produces
an audible warning when the door and/or its
screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. In
dwellings not required to be Accessible units, Type
A units or Type B units, the deactivation switch
shall be located 54 inches (1372 mm) or more
above the threshold of the door. In dwellings
required to be Accessible units, Type A units or
Type B units, the deactivation switch(es) shall be

SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

located at 54 inches (1372 mm) maximum and 48
inches (1219 mm) minimum above the threshold
of the door.

2. The pool shall be equipped with a power safety
cover that complies with ASTM F 1346.

3. Other means of protection, such as self-closing
doo rs w i th se l f - la tch ing dev ices , wh ich a re
approved, shall be accepted so long as the degree
of protection afforded is not less than the protec-
tion afforded by Section 3109.4.1.8, Item 1 or 2.

3109.4.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-
ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the
barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the
means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or
steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be
surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of
Sections 3109.4.1.1 through 3109.4.1.8. When the lad-
der or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening
created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter
(102 mm) sphere.

3109.4.2 Indoor swimming pools. Walls surrounding
indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply
with Section 3109.4.1.8.

3109.4.3 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so
as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar
objects from being used to climb the barriers.

3109.5 Entrapment avoidance. Suction outlets shall be
designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7.

➡

SECTION 3110
AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES

3110.1 General. Automatic vehicular gates shall comply with
the requirements of this section and other applicable sections of
this code.

3110.2 Definitions. The following word and term shall, for the
purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this code,
have the meaning shown herein.

VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a
vehicular entrance or exit to a facility, building or portion
thereof, and that is not intended for use by pedestrian traffic.

3110.3 Vehicular gates intended for automation. Vehicular
gates intended for automation shall be designed, constructed
and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F
2200.

3110.4 Vehicular gate openers. Vehicular gate openers, when
provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

563

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:52 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

564

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

31_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:25)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:19:52 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY

CHAPTER 32

3202 .3 Encroachments 8 feet or more above grade .
Encroachments 8 feet (2438 mm) or more above grade shall
comply with Sections 3202.3.1 through 3202.3.4.
3202.3.1 Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs. Awn-
ings, canopies, marquees and signs shall be constructed so
as to support applicable loads as specified in Chapter 16.
Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs with less than 15
feet (4572 mm) clearance above the sidewalk shall not
extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the
sidewalk measured from the building. Stanchions or col-
umns that support awnings, canopies, marquees and signs
shall be located not less than 2 feet (610 mm) in from the
curb line.
3202.3.2 Windows, balconies, architectural features and
mechanical equipment. Where the vertical clearance
above grade to projecting windows, balconies, architectural
features or mechanical equipment is more than 8 feet (2438
mm), 1 inch (25 mm) of encroachment is permitted for each
additional 1 inch (25 mm) of clearance above 8 feet (2438
mm), but the maximum encroachment shall be 4 feet (1219
mm).
3202.3.3 Encroachments 15 feet or more above grade.
Encroachments 15 feet (4572 mm) or more above grade
shall not be limited.
3202.3.4 Pedestrian walkways. The installation of a
pedestrian walkway over a public right-of-way shall be sub-
ject to the approval of the applicable governing authority.
The vertical clearance from the public right-of-way to the
lowest part of a pedestrian walkway shall be 15 feet (4572
mm) minimum.
3202.4 Temporary encroachments. Where allowed by the
applicable governing authority, vestibules and storm enclo-
sures shall not be erected for a period of time exceeding seven
months in any one year and shall not encroach more than 3 feet
(914 mm) nor more than one-fourth of the width of the side-
walk beyond the street lot line. Temporary entrance awnings
shall be erected with a minimum clearance of 7 feet (2134 mm)
to the lowest portion of the hood or awning where supported on
removable steel or other approved noncombustible support.

SECTION 3201
GENERAL

3201.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
encroachment of structures into the public right-of-way.
3201.2 Measurement. The projection of any structure or por-
tion thereof shall be the distance measured horizontally from
the lot line to the outermost point of the projection.
3201.3 Other laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to permit the violation of other laws or ordinances
regulating the use and occupancy of public property.
3201.4 Drainage. Drainage water collected from a roof, awn-
ing, canopy or marquee, and condensate from mechanical
equipment shall not flow over a public walking surface.

SECTION 3202
ENCROACHMENTS
3202.1 Encroachments below grade. Encroachments below
grade shall comply with Sections 3202.1.1 through 3202.1.3.
3202.1.1 Structural support. A part of a building erected
below grade that is necessary for structural support of the
building or structure shall not project beyond the lot lines,
except that the footings of street walls or their supports
which are located at least 8 feet (2438 mm) below grade
shall not project more than 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the
street lot line.

3202.1.2 Vaults and other enclosed spaces. The construc-
tion and utilization of vaults and other enclosed spaces
below grade shall be subject to the terms and conditions of
the applicable governing authority.
3202.1.3 Areaways. Areaways shall be protected by grates,
guards or other approved means.
3202.2 Encroachments above grade and below 8 feet in
height. Encroachments into the public right-of-way above
grade and below 8 feet (2438 mm) in height shall be prohibited
except as provided for in Sections 3202.2.1 through 3202.2.3.
Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public
right-of-way.
3202.2.1 Steps. Steps shall not project more than 12 inches
(305 mm) and shall be guarded by approved devices not less
than 3 feet (914 mm) high, or shall be located between col-
umns or pilasters.
3202.2.2 Architectural features. Columns or pilasters,
including bases and moldings shall not project more than 12
inches (305 mm). Belt courses, lintels, sills, architraves,
pediments and similar architectural features shall not pro-
ject more than 4 inches (102 mm).
3202.2.3 Awnings. The vertical clearance from the public
right-of-way to the lowest part of any awning, including
valances, shall be 7 feet (2134 mm) minimum.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

565

32_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:26)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:20:40 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

566

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

32_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:26)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:20:40 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 33

SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION

SECTION 3301
GENERAL

3301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern
safety during construction and the protection of adjacent public
and private properties.
3301.2 Storage and placement. Construction equipment and
materials shall be stored and placed so as not to endanger the
public, the workers or adjoining property for the duration of the
construction project.

SECTION 3302
CONSTRUCTION SAFEGUARDS
3302.1 Remodeling and additions. Required exits, existing
structural elements, fire protection devices and sanitary safe-
guards shall be maintained at all times during remodeling,
alterations, repairs or additions to any building or structure.
Exceptions:
1. When such required elements or devices are being
remodeled, altered or repaired, adequate substitute
provisions shall be made.
2. When the existing building is not occupied.
3302.2 Manner of removal. Waste materials shall be removed
in a manner which prevents injury or damage to persons,
adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.

SECTION 3303
DEMOLITION
3303.1 Construction documents. Construction documents
and a schedule for demolition must be submitted when
required by the building official. Where such information is
required, no work shall be done until such construction docu-
ments or schedule, or both, are approved.
3303.2 Pedestrian protection. The work of demolishing any
building shall not be commenced until pedestrian protection is
in place as required by this chapter.
3303.3 Means of egress. A party wall balcony or horizontal
exit shall not be destroyed unless and until a substitute means of
egress has been provided and approved.
3303.4 Vacant lot. Where a structure has been demolished or
removed, the vacant lot shall be filled and maintained to the
existing grade or in accordance with the ordinances of the juris-
diction having authority.
3303.5 Water accumulation. Provision shall be made to pre-
vent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations
on the premises or the adjoining property.

3303.6 Utility connections. Service utility connections shall
be discontinued and capped in accordance with the approved
rules and the requirements of the applicable governing author-
ity.

SECTION 3304
SITE WORK

3304.1 Excavation and fill. Excavation and fill for buildings
and structures shall be constructed or protected so as not to
endanger life or property. Stumps and roots shall be removed
from the soil to a depth of at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the
surface of the ground in the area to be occupied by the building.
Wood forms which have been used in placing concrete, if
within the ground or between foundation sills and the ground,
shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any
purpose. Before completion, loose or casual wood shall be
removed from direct contact with the ground under the build-
ing.

3304.1.1 Slope limits. Slopes for permanent fill shall not be
steeper than one unit vertical
in two units horizontal
(50-percent slope). Cut slopes for permanent excavations
shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in two units hori-
zontal (50-percent slope). Deviation from the foregoing
limitations for cut slopes shall be permitted only upon the
presentation of a soil investigation report acceptable to the
building official.

3304.1.2 Surcharge. No fill or other surcharge loads shall
be placed adjacent to any building or structure unless such
building or structure is capable of withstanding the addi-
tional loads caused by the fill or surcharge. Existing foot-
ings or foundations which can be affected by any excavation
shall be underpinned adequately or otherwise protected
against settlement and shall be protected against later move-
ment.

3304.1.3 Footings on adjacent slopes. For footings on
adjacent slopes, see Chapter 18.

3304.1.4 Fill supporting foundations. Fill to be used to
support the foundations of any building or structure shall
comply with Section 1804.5. Special inspections of com-
pacted fill shall be in accordance with Section 1704.7.

SECTION 3305
SANITARY

3305.1 Facilities required. Sanitary facilities shall be pro-
vided during construction, remodeling or demolition activities
in accordance with the International Plumbing Code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

567

33_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:27)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:14:25 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION

SECTION 3306
PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS

3306.1 Protection required. Pedestrians shall be protected
during construction, remodeling and demolition activities as
required by this chapter and Table 3306.1. Signs shall be pro-
vided to direct pedestrian traffic.
3306.2 Walkways. A walkway shall be provided for pedes-
trian travel in front of every construction and demolition site
unless the applicable governing authority authorizes the side-
walk to be fenced or closed. Walkways shall be of sufficient
width to accommodate the pedestrian traffic, but in no case
shall they be less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in width. Walkways
shall be provided with a durable walking surface. Walkways
shall be accessible in accordance with Chapter 11 and shall be
designed to support all imposed loads and in no case shall the
design live load be less than 150 pounds per square foot (psf)
(7.2 kN/m2).
3306.3 Directional barricades. Pedestrian traffic shall be pro-
tected by a directional barricade where the walkway extends
into the street. The directional barricade shall be of sufficient
size and construction to direct vehicular traffic away from the
pedestrian path.
3306.4 Construction railings. Construction railings shall be
at least 42 inches (1067 mm) in height and shall be sufficient to
direct pedestrians around construction areas.
3306.5 Barriers. Barriers shall be a minimum of 8 feet (2438
mm) in height and shall be placed on the side of the walkway
nearest the construction. Barriers shall extend the entire length
of the construction site. Openings in such barriers shall be pro-
tected by doors which are normally kept closed.
3306.6 Barrier design. Barriers shall be designed to resist
loads required in Chapter 16 unless constructed as follows:
1. Barriers shall be provided with 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm
by 102 mm) top and bottom plates.
2. The barrier material shall be a minimum of 3/4-inch (19.1
mm) boards or 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) wood structural use
panels.
3. Wood structural use panels shall be bonded with an
adhesive identical to that for exterior wood structural use
panels.

4. Wood structural use panels 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) or 5/16 inch
(23.8 mm) in thickness shall have studs spaced not more
than 2 feet (610 mm) on center (o.c.).
5. Wood structural use panels 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) or 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) in thickness shall have studs spaced not more
than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center provided a 2-inch by
4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) stiffener is placed horizon-
tally at midheight where the stud spacing exceeds 2 feet
(610 mm) o.c.
6. Wood structural use panels 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) or thicker
shall not span over 8 feet (2438 mm).
3306.7 Covered walkways. Covered walkways shall have a
minimum clear height of 8 feet (2438 mm) as measured from
the floor surface to the canopy overhead. Adequate lighting
shall be provided at all times. Covered walkways shall be
designed to support all imposed loads. In no case shall the
design live load be less than 150 psf (7.2 kN/m2) for the entire
structure.
Exception: Roofs and supporting structures of covered
walkways for new, light-frame construction not exceeding
two stories above grade plane are permitted to be designed
for a live load of 75 psf (3.6kN/m2) or the loads imposed on
them, whichever is greater. In lieu of such designs, the roof
and supporting structure of a covered walkway are permit-
ted to be constructed as follows:
1. Footings shall be continuous 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm
by 152 mm) members.
2. Posts not less than 4 inches by 6 inches (102 mm by
152 mm) shall be provided on both sides of the roof
and spaced not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) on cen-
ter.
3. Stringers not less than 4 inches by 12 inches (102 mm
by 305 mm) shall be placed on edge upon the posts.
4. Joists resting on the stringers shall be at least 2 inches
by 8 inches (51 mm by 203 mm) and shall be spaced
not more than 2 feet (610 mm) on center.
5. The deck shall be planks at least 2 inches (51 mm)
thick or wood structural panels with an exterior expo-
sure durability classification at least 23/32 inch (18.3
mm) thick nailed to the joists.

HEIGHT OF
CONSTRUCTION

8 feet or less

More than 8 feet

TABLE 3306.1
PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS

DISTANCE FROM CONSTRUCTION TO LOT LINE

TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED

Less than 5 feet

5 feet or more

Less than 5 feet

Construction railings

None

Barrier and covered walkway

5 feet or more, but not more than one-fourth the height of construction

Barrier and covered walkway

5 feet or more, but between one-fourth and one-half the height of construction

Barrier

5 feet or more, but exceeding one-half the height of construction

None

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

568

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

33_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:27)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:14:25 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

6. Each post shall be knee braced to joists and stringers
by 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) minimum
members 4 feet (1219 mm) long.
7. A 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) minimum
curb shall be set on edge along the outside edge of the
deck.
3306.8 Repair, maintenance and removal. Pedestrian protec-
tion required by this chapter shall be maintained in place and
kept in good order for the entire length of time pedestrians may
be endangered. The owner or the owner’s agent, upon the com-
pletion of the construction activity, shall immediately remove
walkways, debris and other obstructions and leave such public
property in as good a condition as it was before such work was
commenced.
3306.9 Adjacent to excavations. Every excavation on a site
located 5 feet (1524 mm) or less from the street lot line shall be
enclosed with a barrier not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
Where located more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the street lot
line, a barrier shall be erected when required by the building
official. Barriers shall be of adequate strength to resist wind
pressure as specified in Chapter 16.

SECTION 3307
PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY
3307.1 Protection required. Adjoining public and private
property shall be protected from damage during construction,
remodeling and demolition work. Protection must be provided
for footings, foundations, party walls, chimneys, skylights and
roofs. Provisions shall be made to control water runoff and ero-
sion during construction or demolition activities. The person
making or causing an excavation to be made shall provide writ-
ten notice to the owners of adjoining buildings advising them
that the excavation is to be made and that the adjoining build-
ings should be protected. Said notification shall be delivered
not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled starting date of the
excavation.

SECTION 3308
TEMPORARY USE OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND
PUBLIC PROPERTY
3308.1 Storage and handling of materials. The temporary
use of streets or public property for the storage or handling of
materials or of equipment required for construction or demoli-
tion, and the protection provided to the public shall comply
with the provisions of the applicable governing authority and
this chapter.
3308.1.1 Obstructions. Construction materials and equip-
ment shall not be placed or stored so as to obstruct access to
fire hydrants, standpipes, fire or police alarm boxes, catch
basins or manholes, nor shall such material or equipment be
located within 20 feet (6096 mm) of a street intersection, or
placed so as to obstruct normal observations of traffic sig-
nals or to hinder the use of public transit loading platforms.
3308.2 Utility fixtures. Building materials, fences, sheds or
any obstruction of any kind shall not be placed so as to obstruct
free approach to any fire hydrant, fire department connection,

SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION

utility pole, manhole, fire alarm box or catch basin, or so as to
interfere with the passage of water in the gutter. Protection
against damage shall be provided to such utility fixtures during
the progress of the work, but sight of them shall not be
obstructed.

SECTION 3309
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS

[F] 3309.1 Where required. All structures under construction,
alteration or demolition shall be provided with not less than
one approved portable fire extinguisher in accordance with
Section 906 and sized for not less than ordinary hazard as fol-
lows:
1. At each stairway on all floor levels where combustible
materials have accumulated.
2. In every storage and construction shed.
3. Additional portable fire extinguishers shall be provided
where special hazards exist, such as the storage and use
of flammable and combustible liquids.
3309.2 Fire hazards. The provisions of this code and the Inter-
national Fire Code shall be strictly observed to safeguard
against all fire hazards attendant upon construction operations.

SECTION 3310
MEANS OF EGRESS

3310.1 Stairways required. Where a building has been con-
structed to a building height of 50 feet (15 240 mm) or four sto-
ries, or where an existing building exceeding 50 feet (15 240
mm) in building height is altered, at least one temporary lighted
stairway shall be provided unless one or more of the permanent
stairways are erected as the construction progresses.
3310.2 Maintenance of means of egress. Required means of
egress shall be maintained at all times during construction,
demolition, remodeling or alterations and additions to any
building.
Exception: Approved temporary means of egress systems
and facilities.

SECTION 3311
STANDPIPES

[F] 3311.1 Where required. In buildings required to have
standpipes by Section 905.3.1, not less than one standpipe shall
be provided for use during construction. Such standpipes shall
be installed when the progress of construction is not more than
40 feet (12 192 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire
department vehicle access. Such standpipe shall be provided
with fire department hose connections at accessible locations
adjacent to usable stairs. Such standpipes shall be extended as
construction progresses to within one floor of the highest point
of construction having secured decking or flooring.
[F] 3311.2 Buildings being demolished. Where a building is
being demolished and a standpipe exists within such a build-
ing, such standpipe shall be maintained in an operable condi-
tion so as to be available for use by the fire department. Such

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

569

33_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:27)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:14:26 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION

standpipe shall be demolished with the building but shall not be
demolished more than one floor below the floor being demol-
ished.
3311.3 Detailed requirements. Standpipes shall be installed
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.
Exception: Standpipes shall be either temporary or perma-
nent in nature, and with or without a water supply, provided
that such standpipes conform to the requirements of Section
905 as to capacity, outlets and materials.
3311.4 Water supply. Water supply for fire protection, either
temporary or permanent, shall be made available as soon as
combustible material accumulates.

SECTION 3312
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM
[F] 3312.1 Completion before occupancy. In buildings where
an automatic sprinkler system is required by this code, it shall
be unlawful to occupy any portion of a building or structure
until the automatic sprinkler system installation has been tested
and approved, except as provided in Section 111.3.
[F] 3312.2 Operation of valves. Operation of sprinkler control
valves shall be permitted only by properly authorized person-
nel and shall be accompanied by notification of duly desig-
nated parties. When the sprinkler protection is being regularly
turned off and on to facilitate connection of newly completed
segments, the sprinkler control valves shall be checked at the
end of each work period to ascertain that protection is in ser-
vice.

570

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

33_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:27)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:14:26 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 34

EXISTING STRUCTURES

SECTION 3401
GENERAL

3401.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the
alteration, repair, addition and change of occupancy of exist-
ing structures.

Exception: Existing bleachers, grandstands and folding
and telescopic seating shall comply with ICC 300-02.

3401.2 Maintenance. Buildings and structures, and parts
thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
Devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be
maintained in conformance with the code edition under which
installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. To
determine compliance with this subsection, the building offi-
cial shall have the authority to require a building or structure to
be reinspected. The requirements of this chapter shall not pro-
vide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and
safety systems and devices in existing structures.

3401 .3 Compliance . Alterations , repairs , additions and
changes of occupancy to existing structures shall comply with
the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of
occupancy in the International Fire Code, International Fuel
Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Plumbing Code, International Property Maintenance Code,
International Private Sewage Disposal Code, International
Residential Code and NFPA 70.

3401.4 Building materials. Building materials shall comply
with the requirements of this section.

3401.4.1 Existing materials. Materials already in use in a
building in compliance with requirements or approvals in
effect at the time of their erection or installation shall be per-
mitted to remain in use unless determined by the building
code official to be dangerous to life, health or safety. Where
such conditions are determined to be dangerous to life,
health or safety, they shall be mitigated or made safe.

3401.4.2 New and replacement materials. Except as oth-
erwise required or permitted by this code, materials permit-
ted by the applicable code for new construction shall be
used. Like materials shall be permitted for repairs and alter-
ations, provided no hazard to life, health or property is cre-
ated. Hazardous materials shall not be used where the code
for new construction would not permit their use in buildings
of similar occupancy, purpose and location.

3401.4 Alternative compliance. Work performed in accor-

dance with the International Existing Building Code shall be
deemed to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

SECTION 3402
DEFINITIONS

3402.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for
the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in the code,
have the meanings shown herein.
DANGEROUS. Any building or structure or portion thereof
that meets any of the conditions described below shall be
deemed dangerous:
1. The building or structure has collapsed, partially col-
lapsed, moved off its foundation or lacks the support of
ground necessary to support it.
2. There exists a significant risk of collapse, detachment or dis-
lodgment of any portion, member, appurtenance or orna-
mentation of the building or structure under service loads.
EXISTING STRUCTURE. A structure erected prior to the
date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a
legal building permit has been issued.
PRIMARY FUNCTION. A primary function is a major activ-
ity for which the facility is intended. Areas that contain a pri-
mary function include, but are not limited to, the customer
service lobby of a bank, the dining area of a cafeteria, the meet-
ing rooms in a conference center, as well as offices and other
work areas in which the activities of the public accommodation
or other private entity using the facility are carried out. Mechani-
cal rooms, boiler rooms, supply storage rooms, employee
lounges or locker rooms, janitorial closets, entrances, corridors
and restrooms are not areas containing a primary function.
SUBSTANTIAL STRUCTURAL DAMAGE. A condition where:
1. In any s tory , the ver t ica l e lemen ts of the la tera l
force-resisting system have suffered damage such that
the lateral load-carrying capacity of the structure in any
horizontal direction has been reduced by more than 20
percent from its pre-damage condition; or
2. The capacity of any vertical gravity load-carrying com-
ponent, or any group of such components, that supports
more than 30 percent of the total area of the structure’s
floor(s) and roof(s) has been reduced more than 20 per-
cent from its pre-damage condition and the remaining
capacity of such affected elements, with respect to all
dead and live loads, is less than 75 percent of that
required by this code for new buildings of similar struc-
ture, purpose and location.
TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE. An alteration of a building
or a facility that has little likelihood of being accomplished
because the existing structural conditions require the removal
or alteration of a load-bearing member that is an essential part
of the structural frame, or because other existing physical or
site constraints prohibit modification or addition of elements,
spaces or features which are in full and strict compliance with
the minimum requirements for new construction and which are
necessary to provide accessibility.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

571

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:26 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

SECTION 3403
ADDITIONS

3403.1 General. Additions to any building or structure shall
comply with the requirements of this code for new construc-
tion. Alterations to the existing building or structure shall be
made to ensure that the existing building or structure together
with the addition are no less conforming with the provisions of
this code than the existing building or structure was prior to the
addition. An existing building together with its additions shall
comply with the height and area provisions of Chapter 5.
3403.2 Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures in
flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, any addition
that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing struc-
ture, as defined in Section 1612.2, shall comply with the flood
design requirements for new construction, and all aspects of
the existing structure shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements for new construction for flood design.
For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas estab-
lished in Section 1612.3, any additions that do not constitute
substantial improvement or substantial damage of the existing
structure, as defined in Section 1612.2, are not required to
comply with the flood design requirements for new construc-
tion.
3403.3 Existing structural elements carrying gravity load.
Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element for
which an addition and its related alterations cause an increase
in design gravity load of more than 5 percent shall be strength-
ened, supplemented, replaced or otherwise altered as needed to
carry the increased load required by this code for new struc-
tures. Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element
whose gravity load-carrying capacity is decreased shall be con-
sidered an altered element subject to the requirements of Sec-
tion 3404.3. Any existing element that will form part of the
lateral load path for any part of the addition shall be considered
an existing lateral load-carrying structural element subject to
the requirements of Section 3403.4.
3403.3.1 Design live load. Where the addition does not
result
in increased design live load, existing gravity
load-carrying structural elements shall be permitted to be
evaluated and designed for live loads approved prior to the
addition. If the approved live load is less than that required
by Section 1607, the area designed for the nonconforming
live load shall be posted with placards of approved design
indicating the approved live load. Where the addition does
result in increased design live load, the live load required by
Section 1607 shall be used.
3403.4 Existing structural elements carrying lateral load.
Where the addition is structurally independent of the existing
structure, existing lateral load-carrying structural elements
shall be permitted to remain unaltered. Where the addition is
not structurally independent of the existing structure, the exist-
ing structure and its addition acting together as a single struc-
ture shall be shown to meet the requirements of Sections 1609
and 1613.
Exception: Any existing lateral load-carrying structural
element whose demand-capacity ratio with the addition
considered is no more than 10 percent greater than its
demand-capacity ratio with the addition ignored shall be

permitted to remain unaltered. For purposes of calculating
demand-capacity ratios, the demand shall consider applica-
ble load combinations with design lateral loads or forces in
accordance with Sections 1609 and 1613. For purposes of
this exception, comparisons of demand-capacity ratios and
calculation of design lateral loads, forces and capacities
shall account for the cumulative effects of additions and
alterations since original construction.
3403.4.1 Seismic. Seismic requirements for alterations
shall be in accordance with this section. Where the existing
seismic force-resisting system is a type that can be desig-
nated ordinary, values of R, W0 and Cd for the existing seis-
mic force-resisting system shall be those specified by this
code for an ordinary system unless it is demonstrated that
the existing system will provide performance equivalent to
that of a detailed intermediate or special system.

SECTION 3404
ALTERATIONS

3404.1 General. Except as provided by Section 3401.4 or this
section, alterations to any building or structure shall comply
with the requirements of the code for new construction. Alter-
ations shall be such that the existing building or structure is no
less complying with the provisions of this code than the exist-
ing building or structure was prior to the alteration.

Exceptions:
1. An existing stairway shall not be required to comply
with the requirements of Section 1009 where the
existing space and construction does not allow a
reduction in pitch or slope.
2. Handrails otherwise required to comply with Section
1009.12 shall not be required to comply with the
requirements of Section 1012.6 regarding full exten-
sion of the handrails where such extensions would be
hazardous due to plan configuration.
3404.2 Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures in
flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, any alter-
ation that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing
structure, as defined in Section 1612.2, shall comply with the
flood design requirements for new construction, and all aspects
of the existing structure shall be brought into compliance with
the requirements for new construction for flood design.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas estab-
lished in Section 1612.3, any alterations that do not constitute
substantial improvement or substantial damage of the existing
structure, as defined in Section 1612.2, are not required to com-
ply with the flood design requirements for new construction.

3404.3 Existing structural elements carrying gravity load.
Any existing gravity load-carrying structural element for
which an alteration causes an increase in design gravity load of
more than 5 percent shall be strengthened, supplemented,
replaced or otherwise altered as needed to carry the increased
gravity load required by this code for new structures. Any
existing gravity load-carrying structural element whose grav-
ity load-carrying capacity is decreased as part of the alteration

572

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009pg572.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:10:31 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

shall be shown to have the capacity to resist the applicable
design gravity loads required by this code for new structures.

3404.3.1 Design live load. Where the alteration does not
result
in increased design live load, existing gravity
load-carrying structural elements shall be permitted to be
evaluated and designed for live loads approved prior to the
alteration. If the approved live load is less than that required
by Section 1607, the area designed for the nonconforming
live load shall be posted with placards of approved design
indicating the approved live load. Where the alteration does
result in increased design live load, the live load required by
Section 1607 shall be used.

3404.4 Existing structural elements carrying lateral load.
Except as permitted by Section 3404.5, where the alteration
increases design lateral loads in accordance with Section 1609
or 1613, or where the alteration results in a structural irregular-
ity as defined in ASCE 7, or where the alteration decreases the
capacity of any existing lateral load-carrying structural ele-
ment, the structure of the altered building or structure shall be
shown to meet the requirements of Sections 1609 and 1613.

Exception: Any existing lateral load-carrying structural
element whose demand-capacity ratio with the alteration
considered is no more than 10 percent greater than its
demand-capacity ratio with the alteration ignored shall be
permitted to remain unaltered. For purposes of calculating
demand-capacity ratios, the demand shall consider applica-
ble load combinations with design lateral loads or forces per
Sections 1609 and 1613. For purposes of this exception,
comparisons of demand-capacity ratios and calculation of
design lateral loads, forces, and capacities shall account for
the cumulative effects of additions and alterations since
original construction.

3404.4.1 Seismic. Seismic requirements for alterations
shall be in accordance with this section. Where the existing
seismic force-resisting system is a type that can be desig-
nated ordinary, values of R, W0 and Cd for the existing seis-
mic force-resisting system shall be those specified by this
code for an ordinary system unless it is demonstrated that
the existing system will provide performance equivalent to
that of a detailed intermediate or special system.

3404.5 Voluntary seismic improvements. Alterations to
existing structural elements or additions of new structural ele-
ments that are not otherwise required by this chapter and are
initiated for the purpose of improving the performance of the
seismic force-resisting system of an existing structure or the
performance of seismic bracing or anchorage of existing
nonstructural elements shall be permitted, provided that an
engineering analysis is submitted demonstrating the following:

1. The altered structure and the altered nonstructural ele-
ments are no less in compliance with the provisions of
this code with respect to earthquake design than they
were prior to the alteration.
2. New structural elements are detailed and connected to
the existing structural elements as required by Chapter
16.

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3. New or relocated nonstructural elements are detailed and
connected to existing or new structural elements as
required by Chapter 16.
4. The alterations do not create a structural irregularity as
defined in ASCE 7 or make an existing structural irregu-
larity more severe.
3404.6 Means of egress capacity factors. Alterations to any
existing building or structure shall not be affected by the egress
width factors in Section 1005.1 for new construction in deter-
mining the minimum egress widths or the minimum number of
exits in an existing building or structure. The minimum egress
widths for the components of the means of egress shall be based
on the means of egress width factors in the building code under
which the building was constructed, and shall be considered as
complying means of egress for any alteration if, in the opinion
of the building code official, they do not constitute a distinct
hazard to life.

SECTION 3405
REPAIRS

3405.1 General. Buildings and structures, and parts thereof,
shall be repaired in compliance with Section 3401.2. Work on
nondamaged components that is necessary for the required
repair of damaged components shall be considered part of the
repair and shall not be subject to the requirements for alter-
ations in this chapter. Routine maintenance required by Section
3401.2, ordinary repairs exempt from permit in accordance
with Section 105.2, and abatement of wear due to normal ser-
vice conditions shall not be subject to the requirements for
repairs in this section.
3405.1.1 Dangerous conditions. Regardless of the extent
of structural or nonstructural damage, the building code
official shall have the authority to require the elimination of
conditions deemed dangerous.
3405.2 Substantial structural damage to vertical elements
of the lateral force-resisting system. A building that has sus-
tained substantial structural damage to the vertical elements of
its lateral force-resisting system shall be evaluated and repaired
in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections
3405.2.1 through 3405.2.3.
3405.2.1 Evaluation. The building shall be evaluated by a
registered design professional, and the evaluation findings
shall be submitted to the code official. The evaluation shall
establish whether the damaged building, if repaired to its
predamage state, would comply with the provisions of this
code for wind and earthquake loads. Evaluation for earth-
quake loads shall be required if the substantial structural
damage was caused by or related to earthquake effects or if
the building is in Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.
Wind loads for this evaluation shall be those prescribed in
Section 1609. Earthquake loads for this evaluation, if
required, shall be permitted to be 75 percent of those pre-
scribed in Section 1613. Values of R, W0 and Cd for the exist-
ing seismic force-resisting system shall be those specified
by this code for an ordinary system unless it is demonstrated
that the existing system will provide performance equiva-
lent to that of an intermediate or special system.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

573

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:27 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3405.2.2 Extent of repair for compliant buildings. If the
evaluation establishes compliance of the predamage build-
ing in accordance with Section 3405.2.1, then repairs shall
be permitted that restore the building to its predamage state
using materials and strengths that existed prior to the dam-
age.
3405.2.3 Extent of repair for noncompliant buildings. If
the evaluation does not establish compliance of the predam-
age building in accordance with Section 3405.2.1, then the
building shall be rehabilitated to comply with applicable
provisions of this code for load combinations, including
wind or seismic loads. The wind loads for the repair shall be
as required by the building code in effect at the time of origi-
nal construction, unless the damage was caused by wind, in
which case the wind loads shall be as required by the code in
effect at the time of original construction or as required by
this code, whichever are greater. Earthquake loads for this
rehabilitation design shall be those required for the design
of the predamage building, but not less than 75 percent of
those prescribed in Section 1613. New structural members
and connections required by this rehabilitation design shall
comply with the detailing provisions of this code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose and location.
3405.3 Substantial structural damage to gravity load-car-
rying components. Gravity load-carrying components that
have sustained substantial structural damage shall be rehabili-
tated to comply with the applicable provisions of this code for
dead and live loads. Snow loads shall be considered if the sub-
stantial structural damage was caused by or related to snow
load effects. Existing gravity load-carrying structural elements
shall be permitted to be designed for live loads approved prior
to the damage. Nondamaged gravity load-carrying compo-
nents that receive dead, live or snow loads from rehabilitated
components shall also be rehabilitated or shown to have the
capacity to carry the design loads of the rehabilitation design.
New structural members and connections required by this
rehabilitation design shall comply with the detailing provisions
of this code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose and
location.
3405.3.1 Lateral force-resisting elements. Regardless of
the level of damage to vertical elements of the lateral
force-resisting system, if substantial structural damage to
gravity load-carrying components was caused primarily by
wind or earthquake effects, then the building shall be evalu-
ated in accordance with Section 3405.2.1 and, if noncompli-
ant, rehabilitated in accordance with Section 3404.2.3.
3405.4 Less than substantial structural damage. For dam-
age less than substantial structural damage, repairs shall be
allowed that restore the building to its predamage state using
materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage. New
structural members and connections used for this repair shall
comply with the detailing provisions of this code for new build-
ings of similar structure, purpose and location.
3405.5 Flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures in
flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, any repair
that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing struc-
ture, as defined in Section 1612.2, shall comply with the flood
design requirements for new construction, and all aspects of

574

the existing structure shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements for new construction for flood design.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas estab-
lished in Section 1612.3, any repairs that do not constitute sub-
stantial improvement or substantial damage of the existing
structure, as defined in Section 1612.2, are not required to
comply with the flood design requirements for new construc-
tion.

SECTION 3406
FIRE ESCAPES

3406.1 Where permitted. Fire escapes shall be permitted only
as provided for in Sections 3406.1.1 through 3406.1.4.

3406.1.1 New buildings. Fire escapes shall not constitute
any part of the required means of egress in new buildings.

3406.1.2 Existing fire escapes. Existing fire escapes shall
be continued to be accepted as a component in the means of
egress in existing buildings only.

3406.1.3 New fire escapes. New fire escapes for existing
buildings shall be permitted only where exterior stairs can-
not be utilized due to lot lines limiting stair size or due to the
sidewalks, alleys or roads at grade level. New fire escapes
shall not incorporate ladders or access by windows.

3406.1.4 Limitations. Fire escapes shall comply with this
section and shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the
required number of exits nor more than 50 percent of the
required exit capacity.

3406.2 Location. Where located on the front of the building
and where projecting beyond the building line, the lowest land-
ing shall not be less than 7 feet (2134 mm) or more than 12 feet
(3658 mm) above grade, and shall be equipped with a counter-
balanced stairway to the street. In alleyways and thoroughfares
less than 30 feet (9144 mm) wide, the clearance under the low-
est landing shall not be less than 12 feet (3658 mm).

3406.3 Construction. The fire escape shall be designed to sup-
port a live load of 100 pounds per square foot (4788 Pa) and
shall be constructed of steel or other approved noncombustible
materials. Fire escapes constructed of wood not less than nomi-
nal 2 inches (51 mm) thick are permitted on buildings of Type 5
construction. Walkways and railings located over or supported
by combustible roofs in buildings of Type 3 and 4 construction
are permitted to be of wood not less than nominal 2 inches (51
mm) thick.

3406.4 Dimensions. Stairs shall be at least 22 inches (559 mm)
wide with risers not more than, and treads not less than, 8
inches (203 mm) and landings at the foot of stairs not less than
40 inches (1016 mm) wide by 36 inches (914 mm) long,
located not more than 8 inches (203 mm) below the door.

3406.5 Opening protectives. Doors and windows along the
fire escape shall be protected with 3/4-hour opening protectives.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009pg574.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:07:55 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

SECTION 3407
GLASS REPLACEMENT

SECTION 3409
HISTORIC BUILDINGS

3407.1 Conformance. The installation or replacement of glass
shall be as required for new installations.

SECTION 3408
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY

3408.1 Conformance. No change shall be made in the use or
occupancy of any building that would place the building in a
different division of the same group of occupancies or in a dif-
ferent group of occupancies, unless such building is made to
comply with the requirements of this code for such division or
group of occupancies. Subject to the approval of the building
official, the use or occupancy of existing buildings shall be per-
mitted to be changed and the building is allowed to be occupied
for purposes in other groups without conforming to all the
requirements of this code for those groups, provided the new or
proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than
the existing use.

3408.2 Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy
shall be issued where it has been determined that the require-
ments for the new occupancy classification have been met.

3408.3 Stairways. Existing stairways in an existing structure
shall not be required to comply with the requirements of a new
stairway as outlined in Section 1009 where the existing space
and construction will not allow a reduction in pitch or slope.

3408.4 Change of occupancy. When a change of occupancy
results in a structure being reclassified to a higher occupancy
category, the structure shall conform to the seismic require-
ments for a new structure of the higher occupancy category.
Where the existing seismic force-resisting system is a type that
can be designated ordinary, values of R, W0 and Cd for the exist-
ing seismic force-resisting system shall be those specified by
this code for an ordinary system unless it is demonstrated that
the existing system will provide performance equivalent to that
of a detailed, intermediate or special system.

Exceptions:

1. Specific seismic detailing requirements of this code
or Section 1613 for a new structure shall not be
required to be met where it can be shown that the level
of performance and seismic safety is equivalent to
that of a new structure. Such analysis shall consider
the regularity, over strength, redundancy and ductility
of the structure within the context of the existing and
retrofit (if any) detailing provided.
2. When a change of use results in a structure being
reclassified from Occupancy Category I or II to Occu-
pancy Category III and the structure is located in a
seismic map area where SDS < 0.33, compliance with
the seismic requirements of this code and Section
1613 are not required.

3409.1 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code relating
to the construction, repair, alteration, addition, restoration and
movement of structures, and change of occupancy shall not be
mandatory for historic buildings where such buildings are
judged by the building official to not constitute a distinct life
safety hazard.
3409.2 Flood hazard areas. Within flood hazard areas estab-
lished in accordance with Section 1612.3, where the work pro-
posed constitutes substantial improvement as defined in
Section 1612.2, the building shall be brought into compliance
with Section 1612.
Exception: Historic buildings that are:
1. Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places;
2. Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Interior as contributing to the historical signifi-
cance of a registered historic district or a district pre-
liminarily determined to qualify as an historic district;
or
3. Designated as historic under a state or local historic
preservation program that is approved by the Depart-
ment of Interior.

SECTION 3410
MOVED STRUCTURES

3410.1 Conformance. Structures moved into or within the
jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this code for
new structures.

SECTION 3411
ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS

3411.1 Scope. The provisions of Sections 3411.1 through
3411.9 apply to maintenance, change of occupancy, additions
and alterations to existing buildings, including those identified
as historic buildings.
Exception: Type B dwelling or sleeping units required by
Section 1107 of this code are not required to be provided in
existing buildings and facilities being altered or undergoing
a change of occupancy.
3411.2 Maintenance of facilities. A building, facility or ele-
ment that is constructed or altered to be accessible shall be
maintained accessible during occupancy.
3411.3 Extent of application. An alteration of an existing ele-
ment, space or area of a building or facility shall not impose a
requirement for greater accessibility than that which would be
required for new construction.
Alterations shall not reduce or have the effect of reducing
accessibility of a building, portion of a building or facility.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

575

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:27 AM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3411.4 Change of occupancy. Existing buildings that undergo
a change of group or occupancy shall comply with this section.
3411.4.1 Partial change in occupancy. Where a portion of
the building is changed to a new occupancy classification,
any alterations shall comply with Sections 3411.6, 3411.7
and 3411.8.
3411.4.2 Complete change of occupancy. Where an entire
building undergoes a change of occupancy, it shall comply
with Section 3411.4.1 and shall have all of the following
accessible features:
1. At least one accessible building entrance.
2. At least one accessible route from an accessible
building entrance to primary function areas.
3. Signage complying with Section 1110.
4. Accessible parking, where parking is being provided.
5. At least one accessible passenger loading zone, when
loading zones are provided.
6. At least one accessible route connecting accessible
parking and accessible passenger loading zones to an
accessible entrance.
Where it is technically infeasible to comply with the new
construction standards for any of these requirements for a
change of group or occupancy, the above items shall con-
form to the requirements to the maximum extent technically
feasible.
3411.5 Additions. Provisions for new construction shall apply
to additions. An addition that affects the accessibility to, or
contains an area of, a primary function shall comply with the
requirements in Section 3411.7.
3411.6 Alterations. A building, facility or element that is
altered shall comply with the applicable provisions in Chapter
11 of this code and ICC A117.1, unless technically infeasible.
Where compliance with this section is technically infeasible,
the alteration shall provide access to the maximum extent tech-
nically feasible.
Exceptions:
1. The altered element or space is not required to be on
an accessible route, unless required by Section
3411.7.
2. Accessible means of egress required by Chapter 10 are
not required to be provided in existing buildings and
facilities.
3. The alteration to Type A individually owned dwelling
units within a Group R-2 occupancy shall meet the
provision for a Type B dwelling unit and shall comply
with the applicable provisions in Chapter 11 and ICC
A117.1.
3411.7 Alterations affecting an area containing a primary
function. Where an alteration affects the accessibility to, or
contains an area of primary function, the route to the primary
function area shall be accessible. The accessible route to the

primary function area shall include toilet facilities or drinking
fountains serving the area of primary function.
Exceptions:
1. The costs of providing the accessible route are not
required to exceed 20 percent of the costs of the alter-
ations affecting the area of primary function.
2. This provision does not apply to alterations limited
solely to windows, hardware, operating controls,
electrical outlets and signs.
3. This provision does not apply to alterations limited
solely to mechanical systems, electrical systems,
installation or alteration of fire protection systems
and abatement of hazardous materials.
4. This provision does not apply to alterations under-
taken for the primary purpose of increasing the acces-
sibility of an existing building, facility or element.
3411.8 Scoping for alterations. The provisions of Sections
3411.8.1 through 3411.8.14 shall apply to alterations to exist-
ing buildings and facilities.
3411.8.1 Entrances. Accessible entrances shall be provided
in accordance with Section 1105.
Exception: Where an alteration includes alterations to
an entrance, and the building or facility has an accessible
entrance, the altered entrance is not required to be acces-
sible, unless required by Section 3411.7. Signs comply-
ing with Section 1110 shall be provided.
3411.8.2 Elevators. Altered elements of existing elevators
shall comply with ASME A17.1 and ICC A117.1. Such ele-
ments shall also be altered in elevators programmed to
respond to the same hall call control as the altered elevator.
3411.8.3 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts com-
plying with ICC A117.1 and installed in accordance with
ASME A18.1 shall be permitted as a component of an
accessible route.

3411.8.4 Stairs and escalators in existing buildings. In
alterations, change of occupancy or additions where an
escalator or stair is added where none existed previously
and major structural modifications are necessary for instal-
lation, an accessible route shall be provided between the
levels served by the escalator or stairs in accordance with
Sections 1104.4 and 1104.5.
3411.8.5 Ramps. Where slopes steeper than allowed by
Section 1010.2 are necessitated by space limitations, the
slope of ramps in or providing access to existing buildings
or facilities shall comply with Table 3411.8.5.

TABLE 3411.8.5
RAMPS

SLOPE

MAXIMUM RISE

Steeper than 1:10 but not steeper than 1:8
Steeper than 1:12 but not steeper than 1:10

3 inches
6 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

576

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:28 AM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

3411.8.6 Performance areas. Where it is technically infea-
sible to alter performance areas to be on an accessible route,
at least one of each type of performance area shall be made
accessible.

3411.8.7 Accessible dwelling or sleeping units. Where
Group I-1, I-2, I-3, R-1, R-2 or R-4 dwelling or sleeping
units are being altered or added, the requirements of Section
1107 for Accessible units apply only to the quantity of
spaces being altered or added.

3411.8.8 Type A dwelling or sleeping units. Where more
than 20 Group R-2 dwelling or sleeping units are being
added, the requirements of Section 1107 for Type A units
apply only to the quantity of the spaces being added.

3411.8.9 Type B dwelling or sleeping units. Where four or
more Group I-1, I-2, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-4 dwelling or sleep-
ing units are being added, the requirements of Section 1107
for Type B units apply only to the quantity of the spaces
being added.

3411.8.10 Jury boxes and witness stands. In alterations,
accessible wheelchair spaces are not required to be located
within the defined area of raised jury boxes or witness
stands and shall be permitted to be located outside these
spaces where the ramp or lift access restricts or projects into
the means of egress.

3411.8.11 Toilet rooms. Where it is technically infeasible
to alter existing toilet and bathing facilities to be accessible,
an accessible family or assisted-use toilet or bathing facility
constructed in accordance with Section 1109.2.1 is permit-
ted. The family or assisted-use facility shall be located on
the same floor and in the same area as the existing facilities.

3411.8.12 Dressing, fitting and locker rooms. Where it is

technically infeasible to provide accessible dressing, fitting
or locker rooms at the same location as similar types of
rooms, one accessible room on the same level shall be pro-
vided. Where separate-sex facilities are provided, accessi-
ble rooms for each sex shall be provided. Separate-sex
facilities are not required where only unisex rooms are pro-
vided.

3411.8.13 Fuel dispensers. Operable parts of replacement
fuel dispensers shall be permitted to be 54 inches (1370
mm) maximum measured from the surface of the vehicular
way where fuel dispensers are installed on existing curbs.

3411.8.14 Thresholds. The maximum height of thresholds
at doorways shall be 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Such thresholds
shall have beveled edges on each side.

3411.9 Historic buildings. These provisions shall apply to
buildings and facilities designated as historic structures that
undergo alterations or a change of occupancy, unless techni-
cally infeasible. Where compliance with the requirements for
accessible routes, entrances or toilet facilities would threaten
or destroy the historic significance of the building or facility, as
determined by the applicable governing authority, the alterna-
tive requirements of Sections 3411.9.1 through 3411.9.4 for
that element shall be permitted.

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3411.9.1 Site arrival points. At least one accessible route
from a site arrival point to an accessible entrance shall be
provided.
3411.9.2 Multilevel buildings and facilities. An accessi-
ble route from an accessible entrance to public spaces on the
level of the accessible entrance shall be provided.
3411.9.3 Entrances. At least one main entrance shall be
accessible.

Exceptions:
1. If a main entrance cannot be made accessible, an
accessible nonpublic entrance that is unlocked
while the building is occupied shall be provided; or
2. If a main entrance cannot be made accessible, a
locked accessible entrance with a notification sys-
tem or remote monitoring shall be provided.
Signs complying with Section 1110 shall be provided at
the primary entrance and the accessible entrance.
3411.9.4 Toilet and bathing facilities. Where toilet rooms
are provided, at least one accessible family or assisted-use
toilet room complying with Section 1109.2.1 shall be pro-
vided.

SECTION 3412
COMPLIANCE ALTERNATIVES

3412.1 Compliance. The provisions of this section are
intended to maintain or increase the current degree of public
safety, health and general welfare in existing buildings while
permitting repair, alteration, addition and change of occu-
pancy without requiring full compliance with Chapters 2
through 33, or Sections 3401.3, and 3403 through 3409, except
where compliance with other provisions of this code is specifi-
cally required in this section.
3412.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to [DATE TO BE

INSERTED BY THE JURISDICTION. NOTE: IT IS RECOMMENDED
THAT THIS DATE COINCIDE WITH THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUILD-
ING CODES WITHIN THE JURISDICTION], in which there is work

involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall
be made to comply with the requirements of this section or the
provisions of Sections 3403 through 3409. The provisions in
Sections 3412.2.1 through 3412.2.5 shall apply to existing
occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in
Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S and U. These provisions shall not
apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I.
3412.2.1 Change in occupancy. Where an existing build-
ing is changed to a new occupancy classification and this
section is applicable, the provisions of this section for the
new occupancy shall be used to determine compliance with
this code.
3412.2.2 Partial change in occupancy. Where a portion of
the building is changed to a new occupancy classification,
and that portion is separated from the remainder of the
building with fire barriers or horizontal assemblies having a
fire-resistance rating as required by Table 508.4 for the sep-
arate occupancies, or with approved compliance alterna-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

577

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:28 AM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

tives, the portion changed shall be made to comply with the
provisions of this section.
Where a portion of the building is changed to a new occu-
pancy classification, and that portion is not separated from
the remainder of the building with fire barriers or horizontal
assemblies having a fire-resistance rating as required by
Table 508.4 for the separate occupancies, or with approved
compliance alternatives,
the provisions of this section
which apply to each occupancy shall apply to the entire
building. Where there are conflicting provisions, those
requirements which secure the greater public safety shall
apply to the entire building or structure.
3412.2.3 Additions. Additions to existing buildings shall
comply with the requirements of this code for new construc-
tion. The combined height and area of the existing building
and the new addition shall not exceed the height and area
allowed by Chapter 5. Where a fire wall that complies with
Section 706 is provided between the addition and the exist-
ing building, the addition shall be considered a separate
building.
3412.2.4 Alterations and repairs. An existing building or
portion thereof, which does not comply with the require-
ments of this code for new construction, shall not be altered
or repaired in such a manner that results in the building
being less safe or sanitary than such building is currently. If,
in the alteration or repair, the current level of safety or sani-
tation is to be reduced, the portion altered or repaired shall
conform to the requirements of Chapters 2 through 12 and
Chapters 14 through 33.
3412.2.4.1 Flood hazard areas. For existing buildings
located in flood hazard areas established in Section
1612.3, if the alterations and repairs constitute substan-
tial improvement of the existing building, the existing
building shall be brought into compliance with the
requirements for new construction for flood design.
3412.2.5 Accessibility requirements. All portions of the
buildings proposed for change of occupancy shall conform
to the accessibility provisions of Section 3411.
3412.3 Acceptance. For repairs, alterations, additions and
changes of occupancy to existing buildings that are evaluated
in accordance with this section, compliance with this section
shall be accepted by the building official.
3412.3.1 Hazards. Where the building official determines
that an unsafe condition exists, as provided for in Section
116, such unsafe condition shall be abated in accordance
with Section 116.
3412.3.2 Compliance with other codes. Buildings that are
evaluated in accordance with this section shall comply with
the International Fire Code and the International Property
Maintenance Code.

3412.4 Investigation and evaluation. For proposed work cov-
ered by this section, the building owner shall cause the existing
building to be investigated and evaluated in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
3412.4.1 Structural analysis. The owner shall have a struc-
tural analysis of the existing building made to determine

adequacy of structural systems for the proposed alteration,
addition or change of occupancy. The analysis shall demon-
strate that the building with the work completed is capable
of resisting the loads specified in Chapter 16.
3412.4.2 Submittal. The results of the investigation and
evaluation as required in Section 3412.4, along with pro-
posed compliance alternatives, shall be submitted to the
building official.

3412.4.3 Determination of compliance. The building offi-
cial shall determine whether the existing building, with the
proposed addition, alteration or change of occupancy, com-
plies with the provisions of this section in accordance with
the evaluation process in Sections 3412.5 through 3412.9.
3412.5 Evaluation. The evaluation shall be comprised of three
categories: fire safety, means of egress and general safety, as
defined in Sections 3412.5.1 through 3412.5.3.
3412.5.1 Fire safety. Included within the fire safety cate-
gory are the structural fire resistance, automatic fire detec-
tion, fire alarm and fire suppression system features of the
facility.
3412.5.2 Means of egress. Included within the means of
egress category are the configuration, characteristics and
support features for means of egress in the facility.
3412.5.3 General safety. Included within the general safety
category are the fire safety parameters and the means of
egress parameters.
3412.6 Evaluation process. The evaluation process specified
herein shall be followed in its entirety to evaluate existing
buildings. Table 3412.7 shall be utilized for tabulating the
results of the evaluation. References to other sections of this
code indicate that compliance with those sections is required in
order to gain credit in the evaluation herein outlined. In apply-
ing this section to a building with mixed occupancies, where
the separation between the mixed occupancies does not qualify
for any category indicated in Section 3412.6.16, the score for
each occupancy shall be determined and the lower score deter-
mined for each section of the evaluation process shall apply to
the entire building.
Where the separation between mixed occupancies qualifies
for any category indicated in Section 3412.6.16, the score for
each occupancy shall apply to each portion of the building
based on the occupancy of the space.
3412.6.1 Building height. The value for building height
shall be the lesser value determined by the formula in Sec-
tion 3412.6.1.1. Chapter 5 shall be used to determine the
allowable height of the building,
including allowable
increases due to automatic sprinklers as provided for in Sec-
tion 504.2. Subtract the actual building height in feet from
the allowable and divide by 12 1/2 feet. Enter the height value
and its sign (positive or negative) in Table 3412.7 under
Safety Parameter 3412.6.1, Building Height, for fire safety,
means of egress and general safety. The maximum score for
a building shall be 10.
3412.6.1.1 Height formula. The following formulas
shall be used in computing the building height value.

578

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:29 AM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Height value, feet =

(

AH

)

-

)
(
EBH
12.5

´

CF

Height value, stories = (

AS EBS

-

)

´

CF

(Equation 34-1)

where:
AH = Allowable height in feet from Table 503.
EBH = Existing building height in feet.
AS
= Allowable height in stories from Table 503.
EBS = Existing building height in stories.
CF = 1 if (AH) – (EBH) is positive.
CF = Con s t ruc t ion - type fac to r shown in Tab le
3412.6.6(2) if (AH) – (EBH) is negative.
Note: Where mixed occupancies are separated and indi-
vidually evaluated as indicated in Section 3412.6, the
values AH, AS, EBH and EBS shall be based on the
height of the occupancy being evaluated.
3412.6.2 Building area. The value for building area shall be
determined by the formula in Section 3412.6.2.2. Section
503 and the formula in Section 3412.6.2.1 shall be used to
determine the allowable area of the building. This shall
include any allowable increases due to frontage and auto-
matic sprinklers as provided for in Section 506. Subtract the
actual building area in square feet from the allowable area
and divide by 1,200 square feet. Enter the area value and its
sign (positive or negative) in Table 3412.7 under Safety
Parameter 3412.6.2, Building Area, for fire safety, means of
egress and general safety. In determining the area value, the
maximum permitted positive value for area is 50 percent of
the fire safety score as listed in Table 3412.8, Mandatory
Safety Scores.
3412.6.2.1 Allowable area formula. The following for-
mula shall be used in computing allowable area:

Aa=(1 + lf + ls) × At
where:
Aa = Allowable area.

(Equation 34-2)

EXISTING STRUCTURES

At = Tabular area per story in accordance with Table
503 (square feet)
ls = Area increase factor for sprinklers (Section
506.3).
lf = Area increase factor for frontage (Section 506.2).
3412.6.2.2 Area formula. The following formula shall
be used in computing the area value. Determine the area
value for each occupancy floor area on a floor-by-floor
basis. For each occupancy, choose the minimum area
value of the set of values obtained for the particular occu-
pancy.

Area value

i =

Allowable
area
i
1,200 square feet

é

ê

1

-

ê
ë

æ
ç

ç
è

Actual
area
Allowable
area

i

i

+ +

. . .

Actual
ar
ea
Allowable
area

n

n

ö
ù
÷
ú
÷
ú
ø
û

(Equation 34-3)

where:
i
= Value for an individual separated occupancy on a
floor.
n = Number of separated occupancies on a floor.
3412.6.3 Compartmentation. Evaluate the compartments

created by fire barriers or horizontal assemblies which
comply with Sections 3412.6.3.1 and 3412.6.3.2 and which
are exclusive of the wall elements considered under Sec-
tions 3412.6.4 and 3412.6.5. Conforming compartments
shall be figured as the net area and do not include shafts,
chases, stairways, walls or columns. Using Table 3412.6.3,
determine the appropriate compartmentation value (CV)
and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parame-
ter 3412.6.3, Compartmentation, for fire safety, means of
egress and general safety.
3412.6.3.1 Wall construction. A wall used to create sep-
arate compartments shall be a fire barrier conforming to
Section 707 with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2
hours. Where the building is not divided into more than
one compartment, the compartment size shall be taken as

TABLE 3412.6.3
COMPARTMENTATION VALUES

CATEGORIESa

a
Compartment size
equal to or greater than
15,000 square feet

b
Compartment
size of
10,000 square feet

c
Compartment
size of
7,500 square feet

d
Compartment
size of
5,000 square feet

e
Compartment
size of
2,500 square feet or
less

0

0

0

0

6

4

5

4

10

10

10

10

14

14

15

16

18

18

20

22

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-3

A-2

A-4, B, E, S-2

F, M, R, S-1

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2.
a. For areas between categories, the compartmentation value shall be obtained by linear interpolation.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

579

34_ibc_2009pg579.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:16:34 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

the total floor area on all floors. Where there is more than
one compartment within a story, each compartmented
area on such story shall be provided with a horizontal exit
conforming to Section 1025. The fire door serving as the
horizontal exit between compartments shall be so
installed, fitted and gasketed that such fire door will pro-
vide a substantial barrier to the passage of smoke.

3412.6.3.2 Floor/ceiling construction. A floor/ceiling
assembly used to create compartments shall conform to
Section 712 and shall have a fire-resistance rating of not
less than 2 hours.

3412.6.4 Tenant and dwelling unit separations. Evaluate
the fire-resistance rating of floors and walls separating ten-
ants, including dwelling units, and not evaluated under Sec-
tions 3412.6.3 and 3412.6.5. Under the categories and
occupancies in Table 3412.6.4, determine the appropriate
value and enter that value in Table 3412.7 under Safety
Parameter 3412.6.4, Tenant and Dwelling Unit Separations,
for fire safety, means of egress and general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.4
SEPARATION VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1
A-2
A-3, A-4, B, E, F, M, S-1
R
S-2

a

0
-5
-4
-4
-5

b

0
-3
-3
-2
-2

c

0
0
0
0
0

d

0
1
2
2
2

e

1
3
4
4
4

3412.6.4.1 Categories. The categories for tenant and
dwelling unit separations are:

1. Category a—No fire partitions; incomplete fire
partitions; no doors; doors not self-closing or
automatic-closing.
2. Category b—Fire partitions or floor assemblies
with less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating or not
constructed in accordance with Sections 709 or
712, respectively.
3. Category c—Fire partitions with a 1-hour or
greater fire-resistance rating constructed in accor-
dance with Section 709 and floor assemblies with a
1-hour but less than 2-hour fire-resistance rating
constructed in accordance with Section 712, or
with only one tenant within the floor area.
4. Category d—Fire barriers with a 1-hour but less
than 2-hour fire-resistance rating constructed in
accordance with Section 707 and floor assemblies
with a 2-hour or greater fire-resistance rating con-
structed in accordance with Section 712.
5. Category e—Fire barriers and floor assemblies
with a 2-hour or greater fire-resistance rating and
constructed in accordance with Sections 707 and
712, respectively.

3412.6.5 Corridor walls. Evaluate the fire-resistance rat-
ing and degree of completeness of walls which create corri-
dors serving the floor, and constructed in accordance with
Section 1018. This evaluation shall not include the wall ele-
ments considered under Sections 3412.6.3 and 3412.6.4.
Under the categories and groups in Table 3412.6.5, deter-
mine the appropriate value and enter that value into Table
3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.5, Corridor Walls,
for fire safety, means of egress and general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.5
CORRIDOR WALL VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1

A-2

A-3, F, M, R, S-1

A-4, B, E, S-2

a

-10

-30

-7

-5

b

-4

-12

-3

-2

ca

0

0

0

0

da

2

2

2

5

a. Corridors not providing at least one-half the travel distance for all occupants
on a floor shall use Category b.

3412.6.5.1 Categories. The categories for Corridor
Walls are:
1. Category a—No fire partitions; incomplete fire
partitions; no doors; or doors not self-closing.
2. Category b—Less than 1-hour fire-resistance rat-
ing or not constructed in accordance with Section
709.4.
3. Category c—1-hour to less than 2-hour fire-resis-
tance rating, with doors conforming to Section
715 or without corridors as permitted by Section
1018.
4. Category d—2-hour or greater fire-resistance rat-
ing, with doors conforming to Section 715.
3412.6.6 Vertical openings. Evaluate the fire-resistance
rating of exit enclosures, hoistways, escalator openings and
other shaft enclosures within the building, and openings
between two or more floors. Table 3412.6.6(1) contains the
appropriate protection values. Multiply that value by the
construction type factor found in Table 3412.6.6(2). Enter
the vertical opening value and its sign (positive or negative)
in Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.6, Vertical
Openings, for fire safety, means of egress, and general
safety. If the structure is a one-story building or if all the
unenclosed vertical openings within the building conform
to the requirements of Section 708, enter a value of 2. The
maximum positive value for this requirement shall be 2.
3412.6.6.1 Vertical opening formula. The following
formula shall be used in computing vertical opening
value.

VO = PV × CF

(Equation 34-4)

VO = Vertical opening value.
PV = Protection value [Table 3412.6.6(1)].
CF = Construction type factor [Table 3412.6.6(2)].

580

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009pg579-580.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:10:22 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

TABLE 3412.6.6(1)
VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION VALUE

PROTECTION

VALUE

None (unprotected opening)

-2 times number floors connected

Less than 1 hour

-1 times number floors connected

1 to less than 2 hours

2 hours or more

1

2

TABLE 3412.6.6(2)
CONSTRUCTION-TYPE FACTOR

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

1.2

FACTOR

IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB

1.5

2.2

3.5

2.5

3.5

2.3

3.3

7

3412.6.7 HVAC systems. Evaluate the ability of the HVAC
system to resist the movement of smoke and fire beyond the
point of origin. Under the categories in Section 3412.6.7.1,
determine the appropriate value and enter that value into
Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.7, HVAC Sys-
tems, for fire safety, means of egress and general safety.
3412.6.7.1 Categories. The categories for HVAC sys-
tems are:
1. Category a—Plenums not in accordance with Sec-
tion 602 of the International Mechanical Code.
-10 points.
2. Category b—Air movement in egress elements not
in accordance with Section 1018.5. -5 points.
3. Category c—Both categories a and b are applica-
ble. -15 points.
4. Category d—Compliance of the HVAC system
with Section 1018.5 and Section 602 of the Inter-
national Mechanical Code. 0 points.
5. Category e—Systems serving one story; or a cen-
tral boiler/chiller system without ductwork con-
necting two or more stories. 5 points.
3412.6.8 Automatic fire detection. Evaluate the smoke
detection capability based on the location and operation of
automatic fire detectors in accordance with Section 907 and
the International Mechanical Code. Under the categories
and occupancies in Table 3412.6.8, determine the appropri-
ate value and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under Safety
Parameter 3412.6.8, Automatic Fire Detection, for fire
safety, means of egress and general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.8
AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

a

A-1, A-3, F,
M, R, S-1

A-2

A-4, B, E, S-2

-10

-25

-4

b

-5

-5

-2

c

0

0

0

d

2

5

4

e

6

9

8

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3412.6.8.1 Categories. The categories for automatic fire
detection are:

1. Category a—None.
2. Category b—Existing smoke detectors in HVAC
systems and maintained in accordance with the
International Fire Code.
3. Category c—Smoke detectors in HVAC systems.
The detectors are installed in accordance with the
requirements for new buildings in the Interna-
tional Mechanical Code.
4. Category d—Smoke detectors throughout all floor
areas other than individual sleeping units, tenant
spaces and dwelling units.
5. Category e—Smoke detectors installed through-
out the floor area.
3412.6.9 Fire alarm systems. Evaluate the capability of the
fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907. Under the
categories and occupancies in Table 3412.6.9, determine
the appropriate value and enter that value into Table 3412.7
under Safety Parameter 3412.6.9, Fire Alarm Systems, for
fire safety, means of egress and general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.9
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM VALUES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, B, E, R
F, M, S

a

-10
0

CATEGORIES
ba

c

-5
5

0
10

d

5
15

a. For buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, add
2 points for activation by a sprinkler waterflow device.

3412.6.9.1 Categories. The categories for fire alarm sys-
tems are:

1. Category a—None.
2. Category b—Fire alarm system with manual fire
alarm boxes in accordance with Section 907.3 and
alarm notification appliances in accordance with
Section 907.9.
3. Category c—Fire alarm system in accordance with
Section 907.
4. Category d—Category c plus a required emer-
gency voice/alarm communications system and a
fire command center that conforms to Section
403.4.5 and contains the emergency voice/alarm
communications system controls, fire department
communication system controls and any other
controls specified in Section 911 where those sys-
tems are provided.
3412.6.10 Smoke control. Evaluate the ability of a natural
or mechanical venting, exhaust or pressurization system to
control the movement of smoke from a fire. Under the cate-
gories and occupancies in Table 3412.6.10, determine the
appropriate value and enter that value into Table 3412.7
under Safety Parameter 3412.6.10, Smoke Control, for
means of egress and general safety.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

581

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:30 AM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

TABLE 3412.6.10
SMOKE CONTROL VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-2, A-3
A-4, E
B, M, R
F, S

a

0
0
0
0

b

1
0
2a
2a

c

2
0
3a
2a

d

3
1
3a
3a

e

6
3
3a
3a

f

6
5
4a
3a

a. This value shall be 0 if compliance with Category d or e in Section
3412.6.8.1 has not been obtained.

3412.6.10.1 Categories. The categories for smoke con-
trol are:
1. Category a—None.
2. Category b—The building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system. Openings are
provided in exterior walls at the rate of 20 square
feet (1.86 m2) per 50 linear feet (15 240 mm) of
exterior wall in each story and distributed around
the building perimeter at intervals not exceeding
50 feet (15 240 mm). Such openings shall be
readily openable from the inside without a key or
separate tool and shall be provided with ready
access thereto. In lieu of operable openings,
clearly and permanently marked tempered glass
panels shall be used.
3. Category c—One enclosed exit stairway, with
ready access thereto, from each occupied floor of
the building. The stairway has operable exterior
windows and the building has openings in accor-
dance with Category b.
4. Category d—One smokeproof enclosure and the
building has openings in accordance with Cate-
gory b.
5. Category e—The building is equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system. Each floor
area is provided with a mechanical air-handling
system designed to accomplish smoke contain-
ment. Return and exhaust air shall be moved
directly to the outside without recirculation to
other floor areas of the building under fire condi-
tions. The system shall exhaust not less than six air

changes per hour from the floor area. Supply air by
mechanical means to the floor area is not required.
Containment of smoke shall be considered as con-
fining smoke to the fire area involved without
migration to other floor areas. Any other tested and
approved design which will adequately accom-
plish smoke containment is permitted.

6. Category f—Each stairway shall be one of the fol-
lowing: a smokeproof enclosure in accordance
with Section 1022.9; pressurized in accordance
with Section 909.20.5 or shall have operable exte-
rior windows.

3412.6.11 Means of egress capacity and number. Evalu-
ate the means of egress capacity and the number of exits
available to the building occupants. In applying this section,
the means of egress are required to conform to the following
sections of this code: 1003.7, 1004, 1005.1, 1014.2, 1014.3,
1015.2, 1021, 1025.1, 1027.2, 1027.6, 1028.2, 1028.3,
1028.4 and 1029 [except that the minimum width required
by this section shall be determined solely by the width for
the
required
capacity
in
accordance with Table
3412.6.11(1)]. The number of exits credited is the number
that is available to each occupant of the area being evalu-
ated. Existing fire escapes shall be accepted as a component
in the means of egress when conforming to Section 3406.
Under
the
categories
and
occupancies
in Table
3412.6.11(2), determine the appropriate value and enter that
value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.11,
Means of Egress Capacity, for means of egress and general
safety.

TABLE 3412.6.11(2)
MEANS OF EGRESS VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, E

B, F, S

M

R

aa

-10

-1

-3

-3

b

0

0

0

0

c

2

0

1

0

d

8

0

2

0

e

10

0

4

0

a. The values indicated are for buildings six stories or less in height. For build-
ings over six stories above grade plane, add an additional -10 points.

TABLE 3412.6.11(1)
EGRESS WIDTH PER OCCUPANT SERVED

WITHOUT SPRINKLER SYSTEM

WITH SPRINKLER SYSTEMa

OCCUPANCY

Stairways
(inches per occupant)

Other egress components
(inches per occupant)

Stairways
(inches per occupant)

Other egress components
(inches per occupant)

Occupancies other than those listed
below

0.3

0.2

Hazardous: H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4

Not Permitted

Institutional: I-2

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

Not Permitted

0.2

0.3

0.3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

0.15

0.2

0.2

582

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:31 AM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3412.6.11.1 Categories. The categories for Means of
Egress Capacity and number of exits are:
1. Category a—Comp liance w ith the m in imum
required means of egress capacity or number of
exits is achieved through the use of a fire escape in
accordance with Section 3406.
2. Category b—Capacity of the means of egress com-
plies with Section 1004 and the number of exits
complies with the minimum number required by
Section 1021.
3. Category c—Capacity of the means of egress is
equal to or exceeds 125 percent of the required
means of egress capacity, the means of egress
comp l ies w i th the m in imum requ ired w id th
dimensions specified in the code and the number
of exits complies with the minimum number
required by Section 1021.
4. Ca tego ry d—The numbe r o f ex i ts p rov ided
exceeds the number of exits required by Section
1021. Exits shall be located a distance apart from
each other equal to not less than that specified in
Section 1015.2.
5. Category e—The area being evaluated meets both
Categories c and d.
3412.6.12 Dead ends. In spaces required to be served by
more than one means of egress, evaluate the length of the
exit access travel path in which the building occupants are
confined to a single path of travel. Under the categories and
occupancies in Table 3412.6.12, determine the appropriate
value and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under Safety
Parameter 3412.6.12, Dead Ends, for means of egress and
general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.12
DEAD-END VALUES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-3, A-4, B, E, F, M, R, S
A-2, E

a

-2
-2

CATEGORIESa
b

0
0

c

2
2

a. For dead-end distances between categories, the dead-end value shall be
obtained by linear interpolation.

3412.6.12.1 Categories. The categories for dead ends
are:
1. Category a—Dead end of 35 feet (10 670 mm) in
nonsprinklered buildings or 70 feet (21 340 mm)
in sprinklered buildings.
2. Category b—Dead end of 20 feet (6096 mm); or 50
feet (15 240 mm) in Group B in accordance with
Section 1018.4, exception 2.
3. Category c — No dead ends; or ratio of length to
width (l/w) is less than 2.5:1.
3412.6.13 Maximum exit access travel distance. Evaluate
the length of exit access travel to an approved exit. Deter-

mine the appropriate points in accordance with the follow-
ing equation and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under
Safety Parameter 3412.6.13, Maximum Exit Access Travel
Distance, for means of egress and general safety. The maxi-
mum allowable exit access travel distance shall be deter-
mined in accordance with Section 1016.1.
Maximum allowable
Max
imum actual
travel distance
travel distance
Max. allowable travel distance

Points

=

20

´

-

3412.6.14 Elevator control. Evaluate the passenger eleva-
tor equipment and controls that are available to the fire de-
partment to reach all occupied floors. Elevator recall
controls shall be provided in accordance with the Interna-
tional Fire Code. Under the categories and occupancies in
Table 3412.6.14, determine the appropriate value and enter
that value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter
3412.6.14, Elevator Control, for fire safety, means of egress
and general safety. The values shall be zero for a sin-
gle-story building.

TABLE 3412.6.14
ELEVATOR CONTROL VALUES

ELEVATOR
TRAVEL

Less than 25 feet of travel
above or below the primary
level of elevator access for
emergency fire-fighting or
rescue personnel
Travel of 25 feet or more above
or below the primary level of
elevator access for emergency
fire-fighting or rescue
personnel

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

CATEGORIES

a

-2

b

0

-4

NP

c

0

0

d

+2

+4

3412.6.14.1 Categories. The categories for elevator
controls are:
1. Category a—No elevator.
2. Category b—Any elevator without Phase I and II
recall.
3. Category c—All elevators with Phase I and II
recall as required by the International Fire Code.
4. Category d—All meet Category c; or Category b
where permitted to be without recall; and at least
one elevator that complies with new construction
requirements serves all occupied floors.
3412.6.15 Means of egress emergency lighting. Evaluate
the presence of and reliability of means of egress emergency
lighting. Under the categories and occupancies in Table
3412.6.15, determine the appropriate value and enter that
value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.15,
Means of Egress Emergency Lighting, for means of egress
and general safety.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

583

34_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:12:31 AM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

TABLE 3412.6.15
MEANS OF EGRESS EMERGENCY LIGHTING VALUES

NUMBER OF EXITS
REQUIRED BY
SECTION 1014

Two or more exits

Minimum of one exit

CATEGORIES

a

NP

0

b

0

1

c

4

1

3412.6.15.1 Categories. The categories for means of
egress emergency lighting are:

1. Category a—Means of egress lighting and exit
signs not provided with emergency power in
accordance with Chapter 27.

2. Category b—Means of egress lighting and exit
signs provided with emergency power in accor-
dance with Chapter 27.

3. Ca tego ry c—Eme rgency powe r p rov ided to
means of egress lighting and exit signs which pro-
vides protection in the event of power failure to the
site or building.

3412.6.16 Mixed occupancies. Where a building has two
or more occupancies that are not in the same occupancy
classification, the separation between the mixed occupan-
cies shall be evaluated in accordance with this section.
Where there is no separation between the mixed occupan-
cies or the separation between mixed occupancies does not
qualify for any of the categories indicated in Section
3412.6.16.1, the building shall be evaluated as indicated in
Section 3412.6 and the value for mixed occupancies shall be
zero. Under the categories and occupancies in Table
3410.6.16, determine the appropriate value and enter that
value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.16,
Mixed Occupancies, for fire safety and general safety. For
buildings without mixed occupancies, the value shall be
zero.

TABLE 3412.6.16
MIXED OCCUPANCY VALUESa

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-2, R

A-3, A-4, B, E, F, M, S

a

-10

-5

b

0

0

c

10

5

a. For fire-resistance ratings between categories, the value shall be obtained by
linear interpolation.

3412.6.16.1 Categories. The categories for mixed occu-
pancies are:

1. Category a—Occupancies separated by minimum
1-hour fire barriers or minimum 1-hour horizontal
assemblies, or both.

2. Category b—Separations between occupancies in
accordance with Section 508.4.

3. Category c—Separations between occupancies
having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
twice that required by Section 508.3.3.
3412.6.17 Automatic sprinklers. Evaluate the ability to
suppress a fire based on the installation of an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.
“Required sprinklers” shall be based on the requirements of
this code. Under the categories and occupancies in Table
3412.6.17, determine the appropriate value and enter that
value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parameter 3412.6.17,
Automatic Sprinklers, for fire safety, means of egress
divided by 2 and general safety.

TABLE 3412.6.17
SPRINKLER SYSTEM VALUES

CATEGORIES

OCCUPANCY

A-1, A-3, F, M, R, S-1

A-2

A-4, B, E, S-2

a

-6

-4

-12

b

-3

-2

-6

c

0

0

0

d

2

1

3

e

4

2

6

f

6

4

12

3412.6.17.1 Categories. The categories for automatic
sprinkler system protection are:
1. Category a—Sprinklers are required throughout;
sprinkler protection is not provided or the sprin-
kler system design is not adequate for the hazard
protected in accordance with Section 903.
2. Category b—Sprinklers are required in a portion
of the building; sprinkler protection is not pro-
vided or the sprinkler system design is not ade-
quate for the hazard protected in accordance with
Section 903.
3. Category c—Sprinklers are not required; none are
provided.
4. Category d—Sprinklers are required in a portion
of the building; sprinklers are provided in such
portion; the system is one which complied with the
code at the time of installation and is maintained
and supervised in accordance with Section 903.
5. Category e—Sprinklers are required throughout;
sprinklers are provided throughout in accordance
with Chapter 9.
6. Category f—Sprinklers are not required through-
out; sprinklers are provided throughout in accor-
dance with Chapter 9.
3412.6.18 Standpipes. Evaluate the ability to initiate attack
on a fire by making a supply of water available readily
through the installation of standpipes in accordance with
Section 905. Required standpipes shall be based on the
requirements of this code. Under the categories and occu-
pancies in Table 3412.6.18, determine the appropriate value
and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under Safety Parame-
ter 3412.6.18, Standpipes, for fire safety, means of egress
and general safety.

584

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009pg584.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Wednesday, March 04, 2009 2:45:48 PM

14

3412.6.18
STANDPIPE SYSTEM VALUES

OCCUPANCY

CATEGORIES

aa

b

c

d

A-1, A-3, F, M, R, S-1
A-2
A-4, B, E, S-2

-6
-4
-12

0
0
0

4
2
6

6
4
12

a. This option cannot be taken if Category a or b in Section 3412.6.17 is used.

3412.6.18.1 Standpipe. The categories for standpipe
systems are:

1. Category a—Standpipes are required; standpipe is
not provided or the standpipe system design is not
in compliance with Section 905.3.
2. Category b—Standpipes are not required; none are
provided.
3. Category c—Standpipes are required; standpipes
are provided in accordance with Section 905.
4. C a t e g o r y d— S t a n d p i p e s a r e n o t r e q u i r e d ;
standpipes are provided in accordance with Sec-
tion 905.
3412.6.19 Incidental accessory occupancy. Evaluate the
protection of incidental accessory occupancies in accor-
dance with Section 508.2.5. Do not include those where this
code requires suppression throughout the buildings, includ-
ing covered mall buildings, high-rise buildings, public
garages and unlimited area buildings. Assign the lowest
score from Table 3412.6.19 for the building or floor area
being evaluated and enter that value into Table 3412.7 under
Safety Parameter 3412.6.19, Incidental Accessory Occu-
pancy, for fire safety, means of egress and general safety. If
there are no specific occupancy areas in the building or floor
area being evaluated, the value shall be zero.

3412.7 Building score. After determining the appropriate data
from Section 3412.6, enter those data in Table 3412.7 and total
the building score.

3412.8 Safety scores. The values in Table 3412.8 are the
required mandatory safety scores for the evaluation process
listed in Section 3412.6.

3412.9 Evaluation of building safety. The mandatory safety
score in Table 3412.8 shall be subtracted from the building score
in Table 3412.7 for each category. Where the final score for any
category equals zero or more, the building is in compliance with
the requirements of this section for that category. Where the final

score for any category is less than zero, the building is not in
compliance with the requirements of this section.

TABLE 3412.6.19
INCIDENTAL ACCESSORY OCCUPANCY AREA VALUESa

PROTECTION
REQUIRED BY
TABLE 508.2.5

PROTECTION PROVIDED

None

1
Hour AFSS

AFSS
with
SP

1
Hour
and
AFSS

2
Hours

2
Hours
and
AFSS

2 Hours and AFSS

-4

-3

-2

-2

-1

-2

0

2 Hours, or 1 Hour
and AFSS

-3

-2

-1

-1

0

0

0

1 Hour and AFSS

-3

-2

-1

-1

0

-1

0

1 Hour

-1

0

-1

0

0

0

0

1 Hour, or AFSS
with SP

-1

0

-1

0

0

0

0

AFSS with SP

-1

-1

-1

0

0

-1

0

1 Hour or AFSS

-1

0

0

0

0

0

0

a. AFSS = Automatic fire suppression system; SP = Smoke partitions (See
Section 508.2.5).
Note: For Table 3412.7, see next page.

TABLE 3412.8
MANDATORY SAFETY SCORESa

OCCUPANCY

FIRE
SAFETY
(MFS)

MEANS OF
EGRESS
(MME)

GENERAL
SAFETY
(MGS)

A-1

16

27

27

A-2

19

30

30

A-3

18

29

29

A-4, E

23

34

34

B

24

34

34

F

20

30

30

M

19

36

36

R

17

34

34

S-1

15

25

25

S-2

23

33

33

a. MFS = Mandatory Fire Safety;
MME = Mandatory Means of Egress;
MGS = Mandatory General Safety.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

585

EXISTING STRUCTURES

TABLE 3412.9
EVALUATION FORMULASa

FORMULA

T.3410.7

T.3410.8

SCORE

PASS

FAIL

FS-MFS ³ 0
ME-MME ³ 0
GS-MGS ³ 0

_____
_____
_____

(FS)
(ME)
(GS)

-

_____ (MFS) =
_____ (MME) =
_____ (MGS) =

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

_____
_____
_____

-

-

a. FS = Fire Safety
ME = Means of Egress
GS = General Safety

MFS = Mandatory Fire Safety
MME = Mandatory Means of Egress
MGS = Mandatory General Safety

15

34_ibc_2009pg585-586.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:15:48 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

EXISTING STRUCTURES

3412.9.1 Mixed occupancies. For mixed occupancies, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Where the separation between mixed occupancies
does not qualify for any category indicated in Section
3412.6.16, the mandatory safety scores for the occu-
pancy with the lowest general safety score in Table
3412.8 shall be utilized (see Section 3412.6.)

2. Where the separation between mixed occupancies
qualifies for any category indicated in Section
3412.6.16, the mandatory safety scores for each occu-
pancy shall be placed against the evaluation scores for
the appropriate occupancy.

TABLE 3412.7
SUMMARY SHEET — BUILDING CODE

Existing occupancy: ________________________________________

Proposed occupancy: _______________________________________

Year building was constructed: ________________________________

Number of stories: ___________ Height in feet:_________________

Type of construction: _______________________________________

Area per floor: ____________________________________________

Percentage of open perimeter increase: ______%

Completely suppressed:

Yes _______ No _______

Corridor wall rating: _______________________________________

Compartmentation:

Yes _______ No _______

Required door closers:

Yes __________ No ______________

Fire-resistance rating of vertical opening enclosures: ______________________________________________________________________

Type of HVAC system: ____________________________________________, serving number of floors: ___________________________

Automatic fire detection:

Yes _______ No ________

Type and location: _________________________________________

Fire alarm system:

Yes _______ No ________

Type: ___________________________________________________

Smoke control:

Yes _______ No ________

Type: ___________________________________________________

Adequate exit routes:

Yes _______ No ________

Dead ends: __________________ Yes _________ No ___________

Maximum exit access travel distance: ______________________________ Elevator controls:

Yes __________ No ______________

Means of egress emergency lighting: Yes _______ No _______

Mixed occupancies:

Yes __________ No ______________

SAFETY PARAMETERS

FIRE SAFETY (FS)

MEANS OF EGRESS (ME)

GENERAL SAFETY (GS)

3412.6.1 Building Height
3412.6.2 Building Area
3412.6.3 Compartmentation

3412.6.4 Tenant and Dwelling Unit Separations
3412.6.5 Corridor Walls
3412.6.6 Vertical Openings

3412.6.7 HVAC Systems
3412.6.8 Automatic Fire Detection
3412.6.9 Fire Alarm Systems

3412.6.10 Smoke Control
3412.6.11 Means of Egress Capacity
3412.6.12 Dead Ends

3412.6.13 Maximum Exit Access Travel Distance
3412.6.14 Elevator Control
3412.6.15 Means of Egress Emergency Lighting

3412.6.16 Mixed Occupancies
3412.6.17 Automatic Sprinklers
3412.6.18 Standpipes
3412.6.19 Incidental Accessory Occupancy

Building score — total value

* * * *No applicable value to be inserted.

586

* * * *
* * * *
* * * *

* * * *

* * * *

* * * *
¸ 2 =

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

34_ibc_2009pg585-586.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:28)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:15:49 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

CHAPTER 35

REFERENCED STANDARDS

This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the
promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title, and the section or sections of this
document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specif ied in Section 102.4.

AA

Standard
reference
number
ADM1—05

ASM 35—00

AAMA

Standard
reference
number
1402—86
AAMA/WDMA/CSA
101/I.S.2/A440—08

ACI

Standard
reference
number
216.1—07

318—08

530—08

530.1—08

Aluminum Association
1525 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 600
Arlington, VA 22209

Title
Aluminum Design Manual: Part 1-A Specification for Aluminum Structures, Allowable Stress Design;
and Part 1-B—Aluminum Structures, Load and Resistance Factor Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.5, 2002.1
Aluminum Sheet Metal Work in Building Construction (Fourth Edition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2002.1

Referenced
in code
section number

American Architectural Manufacturers Association
1827 Waldon Office Square, Suite 550
Schaumburg, IL 60173

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard Specifications for Aluminum Siding, Soffit and Fascia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.5.1

North American Fenestration Standard/Specifications for Windows, Doors and Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5.1, 2405.5

American Concrete Institute
38800 Country Club Drive
Farmington Hills, MI 48331

Referenced
in code
section number

Title
Standard Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and
Masonry Construction Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 720.1(2), 721.1
Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.2, 1614.3.1, 1614.4.1, 1704.3.1.3, Table 1704.3,
1704.4.1, Table 1704.4, 1708. 2,
1808.8.2, Table 1808.8.2, 1808.8.5, 1808.8.6, 1810.2.4.1, 1810.3.2.1.1,
1810.3.2.1.2, 1810.3.8.3.1, 1810.3.8.3.3, 1810.3.9.4.2.1, 1810.3.9.4.2.2, 1810.3.11.1, 1901.2,
1901.3, 1901.4, 1902.1, 1903.1, 1904.1, 1904.2, 1904.3, 1904.4.1, 1904.4.2, 1904.5, 1905.1.1, 1905.2,
1905.3, 1905.4, 1905.5, 1905.6.2, 1905.6.3, 1905.6.4, 1905.6.5, 1905.7, 1905.8, 1905.9,
1905.10, 1905.11, 1905.12, 1905.13, 1906.1, 1906.2, 1906.3, 1906.4, 1907.1, 1907.2, 1907.3,
1907.4, 1907.5, 1907.6, 1907.7.1, 1907.7.2, 1907.7.3, 1907.7.4, 1907.7.5, 1907.7.6, 1907.8, 1907.9, 1907.10,
1907.11, 1907.12, 1907.13, 1908.1, 1908.1.1, 1908.1.2, 1908.1.3, 1908.1.4, 1908.1.5, 1908.1.6,
1908.1.7, 1908.1.8, 1908.1.9, 1908.1.10, 1909.1, 1909.3, 1909.4, 1909.5, 1909.6, 1912.1, 2108.3, 2205.3
Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5, 1405.5.2, 1405.9, 1604.3.4,
1704.5, 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.1, 1704.5.2, 1704.5.3,
Table 1704.5.3, 1807.1.6.3.2, 1808.9, 2101.2.2, 2101.2.3,
2101.2.4, 2101.2.5, 2101.2.6, 2103.1.3.6, 2106.1,
2107.1, 2107.2, 2107.3, 2107.4, 2107.5, 2108.1, 2108.2, 2108.3,
2109.1, 2109.1.1, 2109.2, 2109.2.1, 2109.3, 2110.1
Specifications for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5.1, Table 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.3, 1807.1.6.3, 2103.8,
2103.11, 2103.12, 2103.13, 2104.1, 2104.1.1, 2104.1.2, 2104.1.3,
2104.2, 2104.3, 2104.4, 2105.2.2.1.1, 2105.2.2.1.2, 2105.2.2.1.3

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

587

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:37 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

AF&PA

American Forest & Paper Association
1111 19th St, NW Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036

Standard
reference
number
WCD No. 4—89
WFCM—01
NDS—05

AF&PA—93
ANSI/AF&PA PWF—07
ANSI/AF&PA SDPWS—08

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Wood Construction Data—Plank and Beam Framing for Residential Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1.2
Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings . . . . . . 1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1, 2301.2, 2308.1, 2308.2.1
National Design Specification (NDS) for Wood Construction with 2005 Supplement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.6.3.2, 1716.1.1,
1716.1.4, 1809.12, 1810.3.2.4, Table 1810.3.2.6, 2302.1, 2304.12, 2306.1,
Table 2306.2.1(1), Table 2306.2.1(2), Table 2306.3, Table 2306.6, 2307.1, 2307.1.1
Span Tables for Joists and Rafters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1.1, 2308.8, 2308.10.2, 2308.10.3
Permanent Wood Foundation Design Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2, 1807.1.4, 2304.9.5.2
Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.6.1, 2305.1, 2306.1, 2306.2.1, 2306.2.2, 2306.2.3, 2306.3,
Table 2306.3, 2306.4, 2306.5, 2306.6, 2306.7, Table 2306.7, 2307.1, 2307.1.1

AISC

Standard
reference
number
341—05

360—05

AISI

Standard
reference
number
S100—07

S200—07
S210—07
S211—07
S212—07
S213—07
S214—07

S230—07

AITC

Standard
reference
number
AITC Technical
Note 7—96
AITC 104—03
AITC 110—01
AITC 113—01
AITC 117—04
AITC 119—96

588

American Institute of Steel Construction
One East Wacker Drive, Suite 700
Chicago, IL 60601-18021

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings, including Supplement No. 1 dated 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.6.2, 1707.2,
1708.3, 2205.2.1, 2205.2.2, 2205.3, 2205.3.1
Specification for Structural Steel Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, Table 1704.3, 1704.3.3, 2203.1, 2203.2, 2205.1, 2205.3

American Iron and Steel Institute
1140 Connecticut Avenue, 705
Suite 705
Washington, DC 20036

Referenced
in code
section number

Title
North American Specification for the Design of Cold-formed
Steel Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2203.1, 2203.2, 2209.1, 2210.2, 2210.4, 2210.5
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—General Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2203.1, 2203.2, 2210.1
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Floor and Roof System Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.5
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Wall Stud Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.4
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Header Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.2
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Lateral Design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.6
North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Truss
Design, with Supplement 2, dated 2008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2210.3.11
Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method for One- and
Two-family Dwellings, with Supplement 2, dated 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1, 2210.7

American Institute of Timber Construction
Suite 140
7012 S. Revere Parkway
Englewood, CO 80112

Title

Referenced
in code
section number

Calculation of Fire Resistance of Glued Laminated Timbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.6.3.3
Typical Construction Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1
Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Standard for Dimensions of Structural Glued Laminated Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Hardwood Species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:38 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

AITC 200—04
ANSI/AITC A 190.1—07

Manufacturing Quality Control Systems Manual for Structural Glued Laminated Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Structural Glued Laminated Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.1.3, 2306.1

AITC—continued

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ALI

Standard
reference
number
ALI ALCTV—2006

ANSI

Standard
reference
number
A13.1—96
(Reaffirmed 2002)
A108.1A—99
A108.1B—99

A108.4—99
A108.5—99
A108.6—99
A108.8—99
A108.9—99
A108.10—99
A118.1—99
A118.3—99

A118.4—99
A118.5—99
A118.6—99
A118.8—99
A136.1—99
A137.1—88
A208.1—99
Z 97.1—04

APA

Standard
reference
number
APA PDS—04
APA PDS
Supplement 1—90
APA PDS
Supplement 2—92
APA PDS
Supplement 3—90
APA PDS
Supplement 4—90

Automotive Lift Institute
P.O. Box 85
Courtland, NY 13045

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard for Automobile Lifts—Safety Requirements for Construction, Testing and Validation (ANSI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3001.2

American National Standards Institute
25 West 43rd Street, Fourth Floor
New York, NY 10036

Title

Referenced
in code
section number

Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.8.6.4
Installation of Ceramic Tile in the Wet-set Method, with Portland Cement Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10
Installation of Ceramic Tile, quarry Tile on a Cured Portland Cement Mortar Setting Bed with
Dry-set or Latex-portland Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.10
Installation of Ceramic Tile with Organic Adhesives or Water-cleanable Tile-setting Epoxy Adhesive . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.6
Installation of Ceramic Tile with Dry-set Portland Cement Mortar or Latex-portland Cement Mortar . . . . 2103.10.1, 2103.10.2
Installation of Ceramic Tile with Chemical-resistant,Water Cleanable Tile-setting and -grouting Epoxy . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.3
Installation of Ceramic Tile with Chemical-resistant Furan Resin Mortar and Grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.4
Installation of Ceramic Tile with Modified Epoxy Emulsion Mortar/Grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.5
Installation of Grout in Tilework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.10.7
American National Standard Specifications for Dry-set Portland Cement Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.1
American National Standard Specifications for Chemical-resistant, Water-cleanable Tile-setting and
-grouting Epoxy and Water Cleanable Tile-setting Epoxy Adhesive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.3
American National Standard Specifications for Latex-portland Cement Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.2
American National Standard Specifications for Chemical Resistant Furan Mortar and Grouts for Tile Installation . . . 2103.10.4
American National Standard Specifications for Cement Grouts for Tile Installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.7
American National Standard Specifications for Modified Epoxy Emulsion Mortar/Grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.5
American National Standard Specifications for Organic Adhesives for Installation of Ceramic Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10.6
American National Standard Specifications for Ceramic Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.5
Particleboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.1.7, 2303.1.7.1
Safety Glazing Materials Used in Buildings—Safety Performance
Specifications and Methods of Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406.1.2, 2406.2, Table 2406.2(2), 2406.3.1, 2407.1,
2407.1.4.1, 2408.2.1, 2408.3, 2409.1, 2409.2, 2409.3.1

APA - Engineered Wood Association
7011 South 19th
Tacoma, WA 98466

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Panel Design Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Curved Panels (revised 1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

Design and Fabrication of Plywood-lumber Beams (revised 1998) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Stressed-skin Panels (revised 1996) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich Panels (revised 1993) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

589

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:38 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

APA PDS
Supplement 5—95
EWS R540—02
EWS S475—01
EWS S560—03
EWS T300—05
EWS X440—03
EWS X450—01

APSP

Standard
reference
number
ANSI/APSP 7—06

ASABE

Standard
reference
number
EP 484.2 (2003)
EP 486.1 (2000)
EP 559 (1997)

APA—continued

Design and Fabrication of All-plywood Beams (revised 1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Builders Tips: Proper Storage and Handling of Glulam Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Glued Laminated Beam Design Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1
Field Notching and Drilling of Glued Laminated Timber Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Glulam Connection Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1
Product Guide—Glulam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1
Glulam in Residential Construction—Western Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

The Association of Pool & Spa Professionals
2111 Eisenhower Avenue
Alexandria, VA 22314

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Catch Basins . . . . 3109.5

American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers
2950 Niles Road
St. Joseph, MI 49085

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Diaphragm Design of Metal-clad, Post-frame Rectangular Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Shallow-post Foundation Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2306.1
Design Requirements and Bending Properties for Mechanically Laminated Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1

ASCE/SEI

American Society of Civil Engineers
Structural Engineering Institute
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 20191-4400

Standard
reference
number
3—91
5—08

6—08

7—05

8—02
19—96
24—05
29—05
32—01

590

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Structural Design of Composite Slabs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1604.3.3, 2209.2.1
Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6, 1405.6.2, 1405.10, 1604.3.4,
1704.5, 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.1, 1704.5.2, 1704.5.3,
Table 1704.5.3, 1807.1.6.3.2, 1808.9, 2101.2.2, 2101.2.3,
2101.2.4, 2101.2.5, 2101.2.6, 2103.1.3.6, 2106.1,
2107.1, 2107.2, 2107.3, 2107.4, 2107.5, 2108.1, 2108.2, 2108.3,
2109.1, 2109.1.1, 2109.2, 2109.2.1, 2109.3, 2110.1
Specification for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6.1, Table 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.3, 1807.1.6.3, 2103.8, 2103.11,
2103.12, 2103.13, 2104.1, 2104.1.1, 2104.1.2, 2104.1.3, 2104.2,
2104.3, 2104.4, 2105.2.2.1.1, 2105.2.2.1.2, 2105.2.2.1.3

Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures including
Supplements No. 1 and 2, excluding Chapter 14 and Appendix 11A . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1504.8, 1602.1, 1604.3, 1604.8.2,
1604.10, 1605.1, 1605.2.2, 1605.3.1.2, 1605.3.2, 1607.11.1,
1608.1, 1608.2, 1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.2.1, 1609.1.1.2.2, 1609.1.2, 1609.3, 1609.4.4,
1609.5.1, 1609.5.3, 1609.6, 1609.6.1, 1609.6.1.1, 1609.6.2, Table 1609.6.2(2), 1609.6.3,
1609.6.4.1, 1609.6.4.2, 1611.2, 1612.2, 1612.4, 1613.1, 1613.2,Table 1613.5.3(1), Table 1613.5.3(2),
1613.5.6, 1613.5.6.1, 1613.5.6.2, 1613.6, 1613.6.1, 1613.6.2, 1613.6.3, 1613.6.4, 1613.6.5,
1613.6.6, 1613.6.7, 1613.7, 1702.1, 1705.3.4, 1708.1, 1708.5, 1808.3.1, 1810.3.6.1,
1810.3.9.4, 1810.3.11.2, 1810.3.12, 1908.1.1, 1908.1.2, 1908.1.9, 2205.2.1, 2205.3, 2205.3.1, 2208.1,
Table 2304.6.1, Table 2306.7, Table 2308.10.1, 2404.1, 2505.1, 2505.2, 3404.4, 3404.5
Standard Specification for the Design of Cold-formed Stainless Steel Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2209.1
Structural Applications of Steel Cables for Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2207.1, 2207.2
Flood Resistant Design and Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.3.2, 1612.4, 1612.5, 3001.2, G103.1, G401.3, G401.4
Standard Calculation Methods for Structural Fire Protection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.1
Design and Construction of Frost Protected Shallow Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.5

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:38 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Three Park Avenue
New York, NY 10016-5990

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.3.3, 911.1.5, 1007.4, 1607.8.1, 1613.6.5, 3001.2, 3001.4,
3002.5, 3003.2, 3007.1, 3008.3, 3008.12, 3008.14.1, 3411.8.2
Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.7, 2702.2.6, 3411.8.3
Safety Standard for Belt Manlifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3001.2

Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .909.13.1

Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1
Safety Standard for Conveyors and Related Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3001.2, 3005.3
Process Piping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.8.6.1

ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Specification for Carbon Structural Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1810.3.2.3
Specification for Zinc Coating (Hot-dip) on Iron and Steel Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9.5
Standard Specification for Chromium and Chromium-nickel Stainless Steel Plate,
Sheet and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(1)
Specification for Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Specification for Low and Intermediate Tensile Strength Carbon Steel Plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts and Studs, 60,000 psi Tensile Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1911.1
Specification for Steel Strand, Uncoated Seven-wire for Prestressed Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.2
Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Aluminum-coated, by the Hot-dip Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(2)
Specification for High-strength Low-alloy Columbium-vanadium Structural Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Specification for High-strength Low-alloy Structural Steel with 50 ksi (345 MPa)
Minimum Yield Point to 4 inches (100 mm) Thick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Specification for Deformed and Plain Billet-steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708.2, 1810.3.10.2
Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-coated Galvanized or Zinc-iron Alloy-coated
Galvannealed by the Hot-dip Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2), 2304.9.5.1
Standard Specification for High-strength Low-alloy Nickel, Copper, Phosphorus Steel H-piles and
Sheet Piling with Atmospheric Corrosion Resistance for Use in Marine Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Specification for Low-alloy Steel Deformed and Plain Bars for
Concrete Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1704.3, 1704.4.1, 2107.4, 2108.3
Specification for Uncoated High-strength Steel Bar for Prestressing Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.10.2
Specification for Steel Sheet, Metallic-coated by the Hot-dip Process and Prepainted by the
Coil-coating Process for Exterior Exposed Building Products. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2)
Specification for Steel Sheet, 55% Aluminum-zinc Alloy-coated by the
Hot-dip Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2)
Standard Specification for Steel Sheet Zinc-5 percent, Aluminum Alloy-coated by the Hot-dip Process . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(2)
Specification for High-strength Low-alloy Steel Shapes of Structural Quality,
Produced by Quenching and Self-tempering Process (QST) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.3
Standard Specification for General Requirements for Steel Sheet,
Metallic-coated by the Hot-dip Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.4.3(1)
Standard Specification for Structural Shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1810.3.2.3
Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1
Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1
Specification for Seamless Copper Tube, Bright Annealed (Metric) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1
Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .909.13.1
Specification for Lead-coated Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1404.5.3,
Table 1507.2.9.2, Table 1507.4.3(1)
Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Steel and Plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.4.3(1)
Specification for General Requirements for Wrought Seamless Copper and Copper-alloy Tube. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1

ASME

Standard
reference
number
A17.1/CSA B44—2007

A18.1—2005
A90.1—03
B16.18—2001
(Reaffirmed 2005)
B16.22—2001
(Reaffirmed 2005)
B20.1—2006
B31.3—2004

ASTM

Standard
reference
number
A 36/A 36M—05
A 153/A 153M—05
A 240/A 240M—07

A 252—98 (2002)
A 283/A 283M—03
A 307—04e01
A 416/A 416M—06
A 463/A 463M—05
A 572/A 572M—07
A 588/A 588M—05

A 615/A 615M—04a
A 653/A 653M—07

A 690/A 690M—07

A 706/A 706M—05a

A 722/A 722M—07
A 755/A 755M—07

A 792/A 792M—06a

A 875/A 875M—06
A 913/A 913M—04

A 924/A 924M—07

A 992/A 992M—06a
B 42—02e01
B 43—98(2004)
B 68—02
B 88—03
B 101—02

B 209—06
B 251—02e01

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

591

35_ibc_2009pg591.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 4:18:10 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

B 280—03
B 370—03

B 695—04
C 5—03
C 22/C 22M—00 (2005)e01
C 27—98 (2002)
C 28/C 28M—00 (2005)
C 31/C 31M—06
C 33—03
C 34—03
C 35—01(2005)
C 36/C 36M—03
C 37/C 37M—01
C 55—06e01
C 56—05
C 59/C 59M—00 (2006)
C 61/C 61M—00 (2006)
C 62—05
C 67—07
C 73—05
C 79—04a
C 90—06b
C 91—05
C 94/C 94M—07
C 126—99 (2005)
C 140—07
C 150—07
C 172—04
C 199—84 (2005)
C 206—03
C 208—95 (2001)
C 212—00 (2006)
C 216—07
C 270—07
C 315—07
C 317/C 317M—00 (2005)
C 330—05
C 331—05
C 406—06e01
C 442/C 442M—04
C 472—99 (2004)

C 473—06a
C 474—05
C 475—05
C 503—05
C 514—04

C 516—02
C 547—06
C 549—06
C 552—03
C 557—03e01
C 568—03
C 578—07
C 587—04
C 588/C 588M—01
C 595—07
C 615—03

592

ASTM—continued

Specification for Seamless Copper Tube for Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Field Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.13.1
Specification for Cold-rolled Copper Sheet and
Strip for Building Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.5.2, Table 1507.2.9.2, Table 1507.4.3(1)
Standard Specification for Coatings of Zinc Mechanically Deposited on Iron and Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9.5.1, 2304.9.5.3
Specification for Quicklime for Structural Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Specification for Gypsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Specification for Standard Classification of Fireclay and High-alumina Refractory Brick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.5
Specification for Gypsum Plasters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Practice for Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1704.4
Specification for Concrete Aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .721.3.1.4, 721.4.1.1.3
Specification for Structural Clay Load-bearing Wall Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.2
Specification for Inorganic Aggregates for Use in Gypsum Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Specification for Gypsum Wallboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Figure 721.5.1(2), Figure 721.5.1(3), Table 2506.2
Specification for Gypsum Lath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Concrete Building Brick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 721.3.2, 2103.1, 2105.2.2.1.2
Specification for Structural Clay Nonload Bearing Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.2
Specification for Gypsum Casting and Molding Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Specification for Gypsum Keene’s Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Building Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale) . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.6.3, 2103.2, 2105.2.2.1.1
Test Methods of Sampling and Testing Brick and Structural Clay Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.4.1.1.1, 2109.3.1.1
Specification for Calcium Silicate Face Brick (Sand-lime Brick) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 721.3.2, 2103.1
Specification for Treated Core and Nontreated Core Gypsum Sheathing Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Loadbearing Concrete Masonry Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 721.3.2, 1807.1.6.3, 2103.1
Specification for Masonry Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Ready-mixed Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..110.3.1
Specification for Ceramic Glazed Structural Clay Facing Tile, Facing Brick and Solid Masonry Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.2
Test Method Sampling and Testing Concrete Masonry Units and Related Units. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3.1.2
Specification for Portland Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Practice for Sampling Freshly Mixed Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1704.4
Test Method for Pier Test for Refractory Mortars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.5, 2111.8, 2113.12
Specification for Finishing Hydrated Lime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Cellulosic Fiber Insulating Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1508.2, 2303.1.5
Specification for Structural Clay Facing Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.2
Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale) . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.6.3, 2103.2, 2105.2.2.1.1
Specification for Mortar for Unit Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.8
Specification for Clay Flue Liners and Chimney Pots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.8, 2113.11, Table 2113.16(1)
Specification for Gypsum Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1914.1
Specification for Lightweight Aggregates for Structural Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.1.1
Specification for Lightweight Aggregates for Concrete Masonry Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3.1.4, 721.4.1.1.3
Specification for Roofing Slate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1507.7.5
Specification for Gypsum Backing Board and Coreboard and Gypsum Shaftliner Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Standard Test Methods for Physical Testing of Gypsum,
Gypsum Plasters and Gypsum Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Test Method for Physical Testing of Gypsum Panel Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Test Methods for Joint Treatment Materials for Gypsum Board Construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Joint Compound and Joint Tape for Finishing Gypsum Wallboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Marble Dimension Stone (Exterior) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.4
Specification for Nails for the Application of Gypsum Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(2), Table 720.1(3),
Table 2306.7, Table 2506.2
Specifications for Vermiculite Loose Fill Thermal Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3.1.4, 721.4.1.1.3
Specification for Mineral Fiber Pipe Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(2), Table 720.1(3)
Specification for Perlite Loose Fill Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3.1.4, 721.4.1.1.3
Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Thermal Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1508.2
Specification for Adhesives for Fastening Gypsum Wallboard to Wood Framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Limestone Dimension Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.4
Standard Specification for Rigid, Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1508.2
Specification for Gypsum Veneer Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Gypsum Base for Veneer Plasters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Blended Hydraulic Cements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Granite Dimension Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:39 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASTM—continued

Specification for Quartz Dimension Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.4
Specification for Slate Dimension Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2103.4
Specification for Water-resistant Gypsum Backing Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Bonding Compounds for Interior Gypsum Plastering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Specification for the Manufacture, Performance and Testing of Metal Suspension
Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panel Ceilings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 808.1.1, 2506.2.1, H107.1.1
Practice for Installation of Metal Ceiling Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 808.1.1
Specification for Nonstructural Steel Framing Members. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2
Specification for Hollow Brick (Hollow Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.6.3,
2103.2, 2105.2.2.1.1
Standard Specification for Perlite Thermal Insulation Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1508.2
Specification for Prefaced Concrete and Calcium Silicate Masonry Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 721.3.2, 2103.1
Specification for Installation of Steel Framing Members to Receive Screw-attached
Gypsum Panel Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1
Specification for High-solids Content, Cold Liquid-applied Elastomeric
Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Separate Wearing Course . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.15.2
Specification for Application and Finishing of Gypsum Board. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2508.1, 2509.2
Specification for Installation of Interior Lathing and Furring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1
Specification for Application of Interior Gypsum Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2511.1.1, 2511.3, 2511.4
Specification for Application of Gypsum Veneer Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2511.1.1
Specification for Application of Gypsum Base to Receive Gypsum Veneer Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2508.1
Specification for Metal Lath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Packaged, Dry Combined Materials for Surface Bonding Mortar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2.2, 2103.9
Specification for Aggregate for Job-mixed Portland Cement-based Plaster. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Standard for Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Application of Portland Cement-based Plaster. . . 2109.3.4.6, 2510.3, Table 2511.1.1, 2511.3, 2511.4, 2512.1,
2512.1.2, 2512.2, 2512.6, 2512.8.2, 2512.9, 2513.7
Specification for Exterior Gypsum Soffit Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Specification for Surface-applied Bonding Compounds Agents for Exterior Plastering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
Specification for Welded Wire Lath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Practice for Construction of Dry-stacked, Surface-bonded Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.9, 2109.2.2
Specification for Steel Drill Screws for the Application of
Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to
Steel Studs from 0.033 inch (0.84 mm) to 0.112 inch (2.84 mm) in Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2
Standard Specification for Load-bearing Transverse and Axial Steel Studs,
Runners Tracks, and Bracing or Bridging, for Screw Application of
Gypsum Panel Products and Metal Plaster Bases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2
Specification for Installation of Cast-in-place Reinforced Gypsum Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1914.1
Specification for High-solids Content, Cold Liquid-applied Elastomeric
Waterproofing Membrane with Integral Wearing Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.15.2
Specification for Predecorated Gypsum Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Specification for Steel Self-piercing Tapping Screws for the Application of
Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Wood Studs or Steel Studs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2
Specification for Installation of Load Bearing (Transverse and Axial) Steel Studs and
Related Accessories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1
Test Method of Sampling and Testing Grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2105.2.2.1.1, 2105.2.2.1.2, 2105.2.2.1.3
Specification for Spray-applied Rigid Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.14.2
Specification for Woven Wire Plaster Base. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Accessories for Gypsum Wallboard and Gypsum Veneer Base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2
Specification for Installation of Lathing and Furring to Receive Interior and
Exterior Portland Cement-based Plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.3.4.6, 2510.3, Table 2511.1.1, 2512.1.1
Specification for Thin Veneer Brick Units Made from Clay or Shale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(2), 2103.2
Specification for Clay Roof Tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1507.3.4
Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Substrate for Use as Sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Specification for Coated Mat Water-resistant Gypsum Backing Panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2, 2509.2
Specification for Flat Nonasbestos Fiber Cement Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.10
Specification for Firebox Brick for Residential Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.5, 2111.8
Specification for Fiber-reinforced Gypsum Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Specification for Application of Gypsum Sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2508.1, 2508.2
Practice for Installing Clay Flue Lining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2113.12
Standard Specification for Discrete Nonasbestos Fiber-cement Interior Substrate Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2509.2
Standard Specification for Faced Rigid Cellular Polyisocyanurate Thermal Insulation Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1508.2

C 616—03
C 629—03
C 630/C  630M—03
C 631—95a (2004)
C 635—06

C 636/C 636M—06
C 645—07
C 652—05a

C 728—05
C 744—05
C 754—04

C 836—06

C 840—07
C 841—03
C 842—05
C 843—99 (2006)
C 844—04
C 847—06
C 887—05
C 897—05
C 920—05
C 926—98a (2005)

C 931/C 931M—04
C 932—06
C 933—05
C 946—91 (2001)
C 954—04

C 955—06

C 956—04
C 957—06

C 960—04
C 1002—04

C 1007—04

C 1019—05
C 1029—05a
C 1032—06
C 1047—05
C 1063—06

C 1088—07a
C 1167—03
C 1177/C 1177M—06
C 1178/C 1178M—06
C 1186—07
C 1261—07
C 1278/C 1278M—06
C 1280—04
C 1283—07
C 1288—99 (2004)
C 1289—07

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

593

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:40 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

C 1314—07
C 1325—04
C 1328—05
C 1386—07
C 1395/C 1395M—06a
C 1396M—06a
C 1405—07
C 1492—03
C 1629/C 1629M—06

C 1658/C 1658M—06
D 25—99 (2005)
D 41—05
D 43—00 (2006)
D 56—05
D 86—07a
D 93—07
D 225—04
D 226—06

D 227—03
D 312—00 (2006)
D 422—63 (2002)e01
D 448—03a
D 450—07
D 635—06

D 1143/D 1143M—07
D 1227—95 (2007)
D 1557—02e01

D 1586—99
D 1761—06
D 1863—05
D 1929—96 (2001)e01
D 1970—01

D 2166—06
D 2178—04
D 2216—05
D 2487—06
D 2626—04
D 2822—05
D 2823—05
D 2843—99 (2004)e01
D 2850—03a
D 2898—04
D 3019—94 (2007)

D 3161—06
D 3200—74 (2005)

D 3201—07
D 3278—(2004)e01
D 3462—07
D 3468—99 (2006)e01

D 3679—06a
D 3689—90 (1995)

594

ASTM—continued

Test Method for Compressive Strength of Masonry Prisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2105.2.2.2.2, 2105.3.1, 2105.3.2
Standard Specification for Nonasbestos Fiber-mat Reinforced Cement Interior Substrate Sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2509.2
Specification for Plastic (Stucco Cement). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2507.2
Specification for Precast Autoclaved Aerated Concrete (AAC) Wall Construction Units . . . . . . . . 2102.1, 2103.3, 2105.2.2.1.3
Specification for Gypsum Ceiling Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Specification for Gypsum Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2506.2
Standard Specification for Glazed Brick (Single Fired, Solid Brick Units) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.2
Standard Specification for Concrete Roof Tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1507.3.5
Standard Classification for Abuse-resistant Nondecorated Interior Gypsum Panel
Products and Fiber-reinforced Cement Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.3.1, 403.2.3.2, 403.2.3.4
Standard Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.4, Table 2506.2
Specification for Round Timber Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.1.11
Specification for Asphalt Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Coal Tar Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Flash Point By Tag Closed Tester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .307.2
Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products at Atmospheric Pressure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Test Method for Flash Point By Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Specification for Asphalt Shingles (Organic Felt) Surfaced with Mineral Granules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.5
Specification for Asphalt-saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.2, 1507.2.3, 1507.3.3,
1507.5.3, 1507.6.3, 1507.7.3, Table 1507.8,
1507.8.3, 1507.9.3, 1507.9.5, Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Coal-tar-saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt Used in Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Particle-size Analysis of Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1803.5.3
Standard Classification for Sizes of Aggregate for Road and Bridge Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.12.3, 1507.13.3
Specification for Coal-tar Pitch Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of Burning of
Self-supporting Plastics in a Horizontal Position. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.4, H107.1.1
Test Method for Piles Under Static Axial Compressive Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.3.1.2
Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Used as a Protective Coating for Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2, 1507.15.2
Test Method for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using
Modified Effort [56,000 ft-lb/ft3 (2,700 KN m/m3)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.7, 1804.5, J107.6
Specification for Penetration Test and Split-barrel Sampling of Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.5.5
Test Method for Mechanical Fasteners in Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716.1.1, 1716.1.2, 1716.1.3
Specification for Mineral Aggregate Used on Built-up Roofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Determining Ignition Properties of Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.16.4, 406.5.3, 1407.11.2.1, 2606.4
Specification for Self-adhering Polymer Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials
Used as Steep Roof Underlayment for Ice Dam Protection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.4, 1507.2.9.2, 1507.3.9,
1507.5.7, 1507.8.8, 1507.9.9
Test Method for Unconfined Compressive Strength of Cohesive Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.5.5
Specification for Asphalt Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Laboratory Determination of Water (Moisture) Content of Soil and Rock by Mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.5.5
Practice for Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes (Unified Soil Classification System) . . . . . Table 1610.1, 1802.3.1
Specification for Asphalt Saturated and Coated Organic Felt Base Sheet Used in Roofing . . . . . . . . . 1507.3.3, Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.10.2
Test for Density of Smoke from the Burning or Decomposition of Plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.4
Test Method for Unconsolidated, Undrained Triaxial Compression Test on Cohesive Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.5.5
Test Methods for Accelerated Weathering of Fire-retardant-treated Wood for Fire Testing . . . . . . . . 1505.1, 2303.2.4, 2303.2.6
Specification for Lap Cement Used with Asphalt Roll Roofing, Nonfibered, Asbestos Fibered and
Nonasbestos Fibered. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for a Wind Resistance of Asphalt Shingles (Fan Induced Method) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.7.1, Table 1507.2.7.1(2)
Standard Specification and Test Method for Establishing Recommended Design Stresses for
Round Timber Construction Poles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.1.11
Test Method for Hygroscopic Properties of Fire-retardant-treated Wood and Wood-based Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2.7
Test Methods for Flash Point of Liquids by Small Scale Closed-cup Apparatus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Specification for Asphalt Shingles Made from Glass Felt and Surfaced with Mineral Granules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.5
Specification for Liquid-applied Neoprene and Chlorosulfonated Polyethylene Used in
Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1507.15.2
Specification for Rigid Poly [Vinyl Chloride (PVC) Siding] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.9, 1405.14
Method for Testing Individual Piles Under Static Axial Tensile Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.3.1.5

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:41 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASTM—continued

Practice for Establishing Allowable Properties for Structural Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.3
Test Method for Impact Resistance of Bituminous Roofing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.7
Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Adhesive for Adhering Roof Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Glass Felt) Surfaced with Mineral Granules . . . 1507.2.9.2, 1507.6.5, Table 1507.10.2
Standard Practices for Establishing Stress Grades for Structural Members Used in Log Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.10
Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement, Asbestos Containing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for Total Energy Impact of Plastic Films by Dart Drop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.7
Test Methods for Liquid Limit, Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index of Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.5.5, 1803.5.3
Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Sheet Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.13.2
Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings—Asbestos-free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement—Asbestos-free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Asphalt-coated Glass Fiber Base Sheet Used in Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for EPDM Sheet Used in Single-ply Roof Membrane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.12.2
Test Method for Expansion Index of Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1803.5.3
Specification for Asphalt-saturated (Organic Felt) Underlayment Used in
Steep Slope Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.3, 1507.5.3, 1507.6.3, 1507.7.3, 1507.8.3, 1507.9.3
Specification for Asphalt-coated Glass Fiber Venting Base Sheet Used in Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Method for High-strain Dynamic Testing of Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1810.3.3.1.2
Specification for Coal Tar Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Reinforced Nonvulcanized Polymeric Sheet Used in Roofing Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.12.2
Specification for Establishing and Monitoring Structural Capacities of Prefabricated Wood I-joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.2
Specification for Evaluation of Structural Composite Lumber Products. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.9
Test Method of Evaluating the Flexural Properties of Fire-retardant-treated
Softwood Plywood Exposed to the Elevated Temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2.5.1
Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement, Asbestos-free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Test Methods for Evaluating the Effects of Fire-retardant Treatment and
Elevated Temperatures on Strength Properties of Fire-retardant-treated Lumber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2.5.2
Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Cold-applied Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Hot-applied Roofing and Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2
Specification for Liquid Applied Acrylic Coating Used in Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.10.2, 1507.15.2
Specification for Styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous
Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Specification for Styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous
Sheet Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Specification for Styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous
Sheet Metal Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous
Sheet Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous
Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Specification for Fiberglass Reinforced Styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS)
Modified Bituminous Sheets with a Factory Applied Metal Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Practice for Calculating Bending Strength Design Adjustment Factors for Fire-retardant-treated
Plywood Roof Sheathing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.2.5.1
Standard Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Organic) Felt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.9.2, 1507.3.3, 1507.6.5
Standard Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous base
Sheet Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11.2
Standard Specification for Liquid-applied Silicone Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.15.2
Standard Specification for Ketone Ethylene Ester Based Sheet Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.13.2
Standard Specification for Inorganic Underlayment for Use with Steep Slope Roofing Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.3
Standard Practice for Calculating Design Value Treatment Adjustment Factors for Fire-retardant-treated Lumber . . 2303.2.5.2
Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Polyolefin Based Sheet Roofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.13.2
Standard Specification for Liquuid Applied Moisture Cured Polyurethane Coating
Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.15.2
Standard Test Method for Wind Resistance of Sealed Asphalt Shingles
(Uplift Force/Uplift Resistance Method). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2.7.1, Table 1507.2.7.1(1)
Test Methods for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11, 402.16.4, 406.5.3,
703.4.2, 719.1, 719.4, 802.1, 803.1.1, 803.9, 806.5,
1407.9, 1407.10.1, 2303.2, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.13, 2603.5.4, 2604.2.4, 2606.4, 3105.4, D102.2.8
Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of
Building Partitions and Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1207.2, 1207.2.1
Test Method for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202, 1203.2

D 3737—07
D 3746—85 (2002)
D 3747—79 (2007)
D 3909—97b (2004)e01
D 3957—06
D 4022—07
D 4272—03
D 4318—05
D 4434—06
D 4479—07
D 4586—00
D 4601—04
D 4637—04
D 4829—07
D 4869—05e01

D 4897—01
D 4945—00
D 4990—97a (2005)e01
D 5019—07
D 5055—05
D 5456—05a
D 5516—03

D 5643—06
D 5664—02

D 5665—99a (2006)
D 5726—98 (2005)
D 6083—05e01
D 6162—00A

D 6163—00e01

D 6164—05

D 6222—02e01

D 6223—02

D 6298—05

D 6305—02e01

D 6380—03
D 6509—00

D 6694—07
D 6754—02
D 6757—07
D 6841—03
D 6878—06a
D 6947—07

D 7158—07

E 84—07

E 90—04

E 96/E 96M—05

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

595

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:41 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

E 108—07a
E 119—07

E 136—04
E 330—02

E 331—00

E 492—04

E 605—93 (2006)

E 681—04
E 736—00 (2006)

E 814—06
E 970—00

E 1300—04e01

E 1354—04a

E 1592—01

E 1602—03
E 1886—06

E 1966—01
E 1996—06

E 2072—04
E 2273—03

E 2307—04e01

E 2404—07a

E 2568—07
E 2570—07

E 2573—07

F 547—01
F 1346—91 (2003)

F 1667—05

F 2006—00 (2005)

F 2090—01a (2007)
F 2200—05
G 152—06
G 154—05
G 155—05a

596

ASTM—continued

Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505.1, 2603.6, 2610.2, 2610.3
Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2, 703.2.1, 703.2.3, 703.3,
703.5, 704.12, 705.7, 705.8.5, 707.6, 712.3.2,
713.3.1, 713.4.1.1, 714.1, 715.2, 715.4.5, 716.5.2, 716.5.3, 716.6.1,
716.6.2.1, Table 720.1(1), 1407.10.2, 2103.2, 2603.4, 2603.5.1
Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750°C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.4.1
Test Method for Structural Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls and Doors by
Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1715.5.2
Test Method for Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Skylights, Doors and Curtain Walls by
Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1403.2
Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Impact Sound Transmission Through Floor-ceiling
Assemblies Using the Tapping Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1207.3
Test Method for Thickness and Density of Sprayed Fire-resistive Material (SFRM)
Applied to Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1704.12.4.1, 1704.12.4.2,
1704.12.4.3, 1704.12.5
Test Methods for Concentration Limits of Flammability of Chemical Vapors and Gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Test Method for Cohesion/Adhesion of Sprayed Fire-resistive Materials Applied to
Structural Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .704.13.2, 1704.12.6
Test Method of Fire Tests of Through-penetration Firestops. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 702.1, 713.3.1.2, 713.3.2, 713.4.1.1.2
Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Exposed Attic Floor Insulation Using
a Radiant Heat Energy Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .719.3.1
Practice for Determining Load Resistance of Glass in Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404.1, 2404.2, 2404.3.1,
2404.3.2, 2404.3.3, 2404.3.4, 2404.3.5
Standard Test Method for Heat and Visible Smoke Release Rates for Materials and Products
Using an Oxygen Consumption Calorimeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .402.12.1
Test Method for Structural Performance of Sheet Metal Roof and Siding Systems by
Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1504.3.2
Guide for Construction of Solid Fuel-burning Masonry Heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2112.2
Test Method for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and
Storm Shutters Impacted by Missiles and Exposed to Cyclic Pressure Differentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2
Test Method for Fire-resistant Joint Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .702.1, 714.3
Specification for Performance of Exterior Windows, Glazed Curtain Walls,
Doors and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Windborne Debris in Hurricanes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2, 1609.1.2.1
Standard Specification for Photoluminescent (Phosphorescent) Safety Markings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1024.4
Standard Test Method for Determining the Drainage Efficiency of Exterior Insulation and
Finish Systems (EIFS) Clad Wall Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1408.4.1
Standard Test Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Perimeter Fire Barrier Systems
Using Intermediate-scale, Multistory Test Apparatus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .714.4
Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Textile, Paper or Vinyl Wall or
Ceiling Coverings to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.1.4
Standard Specification for PB Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1408.2
Standard Test Method for Evaluating Water-resistive Barrier (WRB) Coatings Used
Under Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) for EIFS with Drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1408.4.1.1, 1704.12.1
Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Site-fabricated Stretch
Systems to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .803.9
Terminology of Nails for Use with Wood and Wood-based Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for
Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3109.4, 3109.4.1.8
Specification for Driven Fasteners: Nails, Spikes and Staples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(2), Table 720.1(3),
1507.2.6, 2303.6, Table 2506.2

Standard/Safety Specification for Window Fall Prevention Devices for
Nonemergency Escape (Egress) and Rescue (Ingress) Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.13.2
Specification for Window Fall Prevention Devices with Emergency Escape (Egress) Release Mechanisms . . . . . . . . 1405.13.2
Standard Specification for Automated Vehicular Gate Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3110.3
Practice for Operating Open Flame Carbon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.6
Practice for Operating Fluorescent Light Apparatus for UV Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.6
Practice for Operating Xenon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.6

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:42 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

AWCI

Standard
reference
number
12-B—98

Association of the Wall and Ceiling Industry
513 West Broad Street, Suite 210
Falls Church, VA 22046

Title
Technical Manual 12-B Standard Practice for the Testing and Inspection of
Field Applied Thin Film Intumescent Fire-resistive Materials; an Annotated Guide, First Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.13

Referenced
in code
section number

AWPA

American Wood Protection Association
P.O. Box 361784
Birmingham, AL 35236-1784

Standard
reference
number
C1—03
M4—06
U1—07

AWS

Standard
reference
number
D1.1—04
D1.3—98
D1.4—98

BHMA

Standard
reference
number
A 156.10—06
A 156.19—02

CGSB

Standard
reference
number
37-GP-52M (1984)
37-GP-56M (1980)

CAN/CGSB 37.54—95

CPA

Standard
reference
number
ANSI A135.4—2004

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
All Timber Products—Preservative Treatment by Pressure Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505.6
Standard for the Care of Preservative-treated Wood Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.4.1, 2303.1.8
USE CATEGORY SYSTEM: User Specification for Treated Wood Except Section 6,
Commodity Specification H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1403.5, Table 1507.9.6,
1807.1.4, 1807.3.1, 1809.12, 1810.3.2.4.1, 2303.1.8,
2304.11.2, 2304.11.4, 2304.11.6, 2304.11.7

American Welding Society
550 N.W. LeJeune Road
Miami, FL 33126

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Structural Welding Code—Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1704.3, 1704.3.1.1
Structural Welding Code—Sheet Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1704.3, 1704.3.1.2
Structural Welding Code—Reinforcing Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1704.3, 1704.3.1.3, Table 1704.4, 2107.4

Builders Hardware Manufacturers’ Association
355 Lexington Avenue, 17th Floor
New York, NY 10017-6603

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Power Operated Pedestrian Doors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1008.1.4.2
Standard for Power Assist and Low Energy Operated Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.2

Canadian General Standards Board
Place du Portage 111, 6B1
11 Laurier Street
Gatineau, Quebec, Canada KIA 1G6

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane, Sheet Applied, Elastomeric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.7, 1507.12.2
Membrane, Modified, Bituminous, Prefabricated and Reinforced for
Roofing—with December 1985 Amendment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1507.11.2
Polyvinyl Chloride Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.13.2

Composite Panel Association
19465 Deerfield Avenue, Suite 306
Leesburg, VA 20176

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Basic Hardboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1404.3.1, 2303.1.6

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

597

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:42 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ANSI A135.5—2004
ANSI A135.6—1998

Prefinished Hardboard Paneling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2303.1.6, 2304.6.2
Hardboard Siding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1404.3.2, 2303.1.6

CPA—continued

CPSC

Standard
reference
number
16 CFR Part 1201(1977)

16 CFR Part 1209 (1979)
16 CFR Part 1404 (1979)
16 CFR Part 1500 (1991)
16 CFR Part 1500.44 (2001)
16 CFR Part 1507 (2001)
16 CFR Part 1630 (2000)

CSA

Standard
reference
number
101/I.S.2/A440—08

CSSB

Standard
reference
number
CSSB—97

DASMA

Standard
reference
number
ANSI/DASMA 107—1997
(R2004)
108—05

115—05

DOC

Standard
reference
number
PS-1—07

PS-2—04

PS 20—05

598

Consumer Product Safety Commission
4330 East West Highway
Bethesda, MD 20814-4408

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Safety Standard for Architectural Glazing Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406.2, Table 2406.2(1), 2406.3.1, 2407.1,
2407.1.4.1, 2408.2.1, 2408.3, 2409.1, 2409.2, 2409.3.1
Interim Safety Standard for Cellulose Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .719.6
Cellulose Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .719.6
Hazardous Substances and Articles; Administration and Enforcement Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Method for Determining Extremely Flammable and Flammable Solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Fireworks Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .307.2
Standard for the Surface Flammability of Carpets and Rugs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804.4.1

Canadian Standards Association
5060 Spectrum Way
Mississauga, Ontario Canada L4W 5N6

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Specifications for Windows, Doors and Unit Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5.1, 2405.5

Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
P. O. Box 1178
Sumas, WA 98295-1178

Title
Grading and Packing Rules for Western Red Cedar Shakes and Western Red Shingles
of the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1507.8.5, Table 1507.9.6

Referenced
in code
section number

Door and Access Systems Manufacturers Association International
1300 Summer Avenue
Cleveland, OH 44115-2851

Title

Referenced
in code
section number

Room Fire Test Standard for Garage Doors Using Foam Plastic Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.9
Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors and Rolling Doors:
Determination of Structural Performance Under Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5.2
Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors and Rolling Doors:
Determination of Structural Performance Under Missile Impact and Cyclic Wind Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2.2

U.S. Department of Commerce
National Institute of Standards and Technology
1401 Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20230

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Structural Plywood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.4, 2304.6.2, Table 2304.7(4), Table 2304.7(5),
Table 2306.2.1(1), Table 2306.2.1(2)
Performance Standard for Wood-based Structural-use Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.4, 2304.6.2,
Table 2304.7(5), Table 2306.2.1(1), Table 2306.2.1(2)
American Softwood Lumber Standard. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.2.4, 2302.1, 2303.1.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:42 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

U.S. Department of Justice
950 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights Section-NYA
Washington, DC 20530

Title
American with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines for
Transportation Vehicles (ADAAG) Department of Justice, 1991 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E109.2.4

Referenced
in code
section number

U.S. Department of Labor
c/o Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, DC 20402-9325

Title

Referenced
in code
section number

Air Contaminants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .902.1

U.S. Department of Transportation
c/o Superintendent of Documents
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20402-9325

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Hazardous Materials Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .307.2

Shippers—General Requirements for Shipments and Packaging—Class 8—Assignment of Packing Group . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2
Specification of Transportation of Explosive and Other Dangerous Articles,
UN 0335, UN 0336 Shipping Containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .307.2

European Committee for Standardization (EN)
Central Secretariat
Rue de Stassart 36
B-10 50 Brussels

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Resilient Floor Coverings—Determination of the Electrical Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5.2

Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Center Plaza
500 C Street S.W.
Washington, DC 20472

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.1.2.1

DOJ

Standard
reference
number
DOJ 36 CFR Part 1192

DOL

Standard
reference
number
29 CFR Part 1910.1000
(1974)

DOTn

Standard
reference
number
49 CFR Parts 100-185-2005
49 CFR Parts 173.137
(2005)
49 CFR—1998

EN

Standard
reference
number
EN 1081-98

FEMA

Standard
reference
number
FIA-TB11—01

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

599

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:43 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

FM

Standard
reference
number
4450 (1989)

4470 (1992)
4474 (04)

4880 (2005)

GA

Standard
reference
number
GA 216—07
GA 600—06

HPVA

Standard
reference
number
HP-1—2004

HUD

Factory Mutual Global Research
Standards Laboratories Department
1301 Atwood Avenue, P.O. Box 7500
Johnson, RI 02919

Title
Approval Standard for Class 1 Insulated Steel Deck Roofs—with
Supplements through July 1992 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1508.1, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.5
Approval Standard for Class 1 Roof Covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1504.7
Evaluating the Simulated Wind Uplift Resistance of Roof Assemblies
Using Static Positive and/or Negative Differential Pressures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.3.1
American National Standard for Evaluating Insulated Wall or Wall and Roof/
Ceiling Assemblies, Plastic Interior Finish Materials, Plastic Exterior Building Panels,
Wall/Ceiling Coating Systems, Interior and Exterior Finish Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4, 2603.9

Referenced
in code
section number

Gypsum Association
810 First Street N.E. #510
Washington, DC 20002-4268

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Application and Finishing of Gypsum Panel Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 2508.1, 2509.2
Fire-resistance Design Manual, 18th Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(1), Table 720.1(2), Table 720.1(3)

Hardwood Plywood Veneer Association
1825 Michael Faraday Drive
Reston, VA 20190

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard for Hardwood and Decorative Plywood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.3, 2304.6.2

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
451 7th Street, SW
Washington, DC 20410

Standard
Referenced
reference
in code
number
Title
section number
HUD 24 CFR Part 3280 (1994) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .G201

ICC

Standard
reference
number
ICC/ANSI A117.1—03

ICC 300—07
ICC 400—07
ICC 500—08
ICC 600—08
IECC—09

600

International Code Council, Inc.
500 New Jersey Ave, NW
6th Floor
Washington, DC 20001

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.2, 907.5.2.3.4, 1007.9, 1010.1, 1010.6.5,
1010.9, 1011.3, 1022.8, 1101.2, 1102.1, 1104.4, 1106.7, 1107.2,
1108.2.2, 1108.2.3, 1108.4.1.1, 1108.4.1.2, 1108.4.1.4, 1108.4.1.5, 1109.1,
1109.2, 1109.2.1.1, 1109.2.2, 1109.2.3, 1109.3, 1109.4, 1109.8, 1109.13,
2902.4, 3001.3, 3008.13.1, 3008.13.2, 3411.6, 3411.8.2, 3411.8.3,  E101.2, E104.2,
E104.2.1, E104.3, E104.3.4, E105.1, E105.2.1, E105.2.2, E105.3, E105.4, E105.6,
E106.2, E106.3, E106.4, E106.4.9, E106.5, E107.2, E107.3, E108.3, E108.4, E109.2.1,
E109.2.2.1, E109.2.2.2, E109.2.2.3, E109.2.3, E109.2.5, E109.2.6, E109.2.8, E110.2, E110.4
ICC Standard on Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating and Grandstands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1, Table 1607.1, 3401.1
Standard on Design and Construction of Log Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2301.2
ICC/NSSA Standard on the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423.1, 423.2
Standard for Residential Construction in High Wind Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1, 2308.2.1
International Energy Conservation Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.6, 1203.3.2, 1301.1.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:43 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

IFC—09

IFGC—09

IMC—09

IPC—09

IPMC—09
IPSDC—09
IRC—09
IWUIC—09
SBCCI SSTD 11—97

ISO

Standard
reference
number
ISO 8115—86

ICC—continued

International Fire Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.5, 102.6, 201.3, 307.1, Table 307.1(1), Table 307.1(2), 307.1.1, 307.2,
403.4.4, 404.2, 406.5.1, 406.6.1, 410.3.6, 411.1, 412.1, 412.6.1, 413.1,
414.1.1, 414.1.2, 414.1.2.1, 414.2, 414.2.5, Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.2.5(2), 414.3,
414.5, 414.5.1, Table 414.5.1, 414.5.2, 414.5.4, 414.5.5, 414.6, 415.1, 415.2, 415.3,
415.3.1, Table 415.3.1, Table 415.3.2, 415.6, 415.6.1, 415.6.1.4, 415.6.2, 415.6.2.3,
415.6.2.5, 415.6.2.7, 415.6.2.8, 415.6.2.9, 415.6.3, 415.6.4, 415.7,
415.8.1, 415.8.2.7, 415.8.5.1, 415.8.7.2, 415.8.9.3, 415.8.10.1, 416.1, 421.1, 421.7,
507.3, 707.1, 901.2, 901.3, 901.5, 901.6.2, 903.2.7.1, Table 903.2.11.6, 903.2.12
903.5, 904.2.1, 905.1, 905.3.6, 906.1, 907.1.8, 907.2.5, 907.2.13.2, 907.2.15, 907.2.16,
907.6.5, 907.8, 909.20, 910.2.2, 1001.3, 1203.4.2, 1203.5, 2702.1,
2702.2.9, 2702.2.11, 2702.2.12, 2702.2.13, 2702.3, 3102.1, 3103.1, 3309.2,
3401.3, 3412.3.2, 3412.6.8.1, 3412.6.14, 3412.6.14.1
International Fuel Gas Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .101.4.1, 201.3, Table 307.1(1),
415.6.3, 2113.11.1.2, 2113.15, 2801.1, 3401.3, A101.2
International Mechanical Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.2, 201.3, 307.1, Table 307.1(1), 406.4.2, 406.6.3,
406.6.5, 409.3, 412.6.6, 414.1.2, 414.3, 415.6.1.4, 415.6.2, 415.6.2.8,
415.6.3, 415.6.4, 415.8.11.1, 416.3, 421.5, 603.1, 603.1.1, 603.1.2,
708.2, 716.2.2, 716.5.4, 716.6.1, 716.6.2, 716.6.3, 717.5, 719.1, 719.7,
903.2.11.4, 904.2.1, 904.11, 908.6, 909.1, 909.10.2, 1015.5, 1018.5.1,
1203.1, 1203.2.1, 1203.4.2, 1203.4.2.1, 1203.5, 1209.3, 2304.5, 2801.1,
3004.3.1, 3401.3, 3412.6.7.1, 3412.6.8, 3412.6.8.1, A101.2
International Plumbing Code®. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.3, 201.3, 415.6.4, 717.5, 903.3.5,
912.5, 1206.3.3, 1503.4, 1805.4.3,
2901.1, Table 2902.1, 3305.1, 3401.3, A101.2
International Property Maintenance Code® .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.4, 102.6, 103.3, 3401.3, 3412.3.2
International Private Sewage Disposal Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.3, 2901.1, 3401.3
International Residential Code® . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.2, 308.2, 308.5, 310.1, 2308.1, 3401.3
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code™ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 1505.1
Test Standard for Determining Wind Resistance of Concrete or Clay Roof Tiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716.2.1, 1716.2.2

International Organization for Standardization
ISO Central Secretariat
1 ch, de la Voie-Creuse, Case Postale 56
CH-1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Cotton Bales–Dimensions and Density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 415.8.2.1.1

NAAMM

National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers
800 Roosevelt Road, Bldg. C, Suite 312
Glen Ellyn, IL 60137

Standard
reference
number
FP 1001—97

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Guide Specifications for Design of Metal Flag Poles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.1

NCMA

Standard
reference
number
TEK 5-84 (1996)

National Concrete Masonry Association
13750 Sunrise Valley
Herndon, VA 22071-4662

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Details for Concrete Masonry Fire Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 720.1(2)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

601

35_ibc_2009pg601.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:43:18 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

NFPA

Standard
reference
number
10—07
11—05
12—05
12A—04 Halon 1301
13—07

13D—07

13R—07

14—07
16—07
17—02
17A—02
20—07
30—08
31—06
32—07
40—07
58—08
61—08
70—08

72—07

80—07

85—07

92B—05
99—05
101—06
105—07
110—05
111—05
120—04
170—06
211—06
252—03
253—06

257—07
259—03
265—07

268—07

285—06

286—06

288—07

409—04
418—06
484—06

602

National Fire Protection Association
1 Batterymarch Park
Quincy, MA 02169-7471

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Portable Fire Extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 906.2, 906.3.2, 906.3.4, Table 906.3(1), Table 906.3(2)
Low Expansion Foam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.7
Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.8, 904.11
Halon 1301 Fire Extinguishing Systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.9
Installation of Sprinkler Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2, 903.3.1.1, 903.3.2, 903.3.5.1.1,
903.3.5.2, 904.11, 905.3.4, 907.6.3, 1613.6.3

Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings
and Manufactured Homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .903.3.1.3, 903.3.5.1.1
Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up to and
Including Four Stories in Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.3.1.2, 903.3.5.1.1, 903.3.5.1.2, 903.4
Installation of Standpipe and Hose System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.2, 905.3.4, 905.4.2, 905.6.2, 905.8
Installation of Foam-water Sprinkler and Foam-water Spray Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 904.7, 904.11
Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.6, 904.11
Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.5, 904.11
Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 913.1, 913.2.1, 913.5
Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.3
Installation of Oil-burning Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2113.15
Dry Cleaning Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.4
Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .409.1
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.3
Prevention of Fires and Dust Explosions in Agricultural and Food Product Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1
National Electrical Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.3, 415.8.2.8.2, 904.3.1, 907.6.1, 909.12.1,
909.16.3, 1205.4.1, 2701.1, 3401.3, H106.1, H106.2, K101, K111.1
National Fire Alarm Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 901.6, 903.4.1, 904.3.5, 907.2, 907.2.5, 907.2.11,
907.2.13.2, 907.3, 907.3.3, 907.3.4, 907.5.2.1.2,
907.5.2.2, 907.6, 907.6.1, 907.6.5, 907.7, 907.7.1, 907.7.2, 911.1.5, 3006.5, 3007.6
Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.5, 508.2.5.2, 715.4, 715.4.5,
715.4.6, 715.4.7.1, 715.4.8.2, 715.5, 715.5.5, 1008.1.4.3
Boiler and Combustion System Hazards Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.1
(Note: NFPA 8503 has been incorporated into NFPA 85)
Smoke Management Systems in Malls, Atria and Large Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.8
Standard for Health Care Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .407.9
Life Safety Code. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1028.6.2
Standard for the Installation of Smoke Door Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4.2, 715.4.3.1, 909.20.4.1
Emergency and Standby Power Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2702.1
Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.1
Coal Preparation Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.1
Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1024.2.6.1
Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-burning Appliances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2112.5
Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.3, 715.4.1, 715.4.2, 715.4.3, 715.4.7.3.1
Test for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering Systems Using a
Radiant Heat Energy Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.12.1, 406.6.4, 804.2, 804.3
Standard for Fire Test for Window and Glass Block Assemblies . . . . . . . . . 715.3, 715.4.3.2, 715.5, 715.5.1, 715.5.2, 715.5.9.1
Test Method for Potential Heat of Building Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.10, 2603.5.3
Method of Fire Tests for Evaluating Room Fire Growth Contribution of
Textile Wall Coverings on Full Height Panels and Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.1.3, 803.1.3.1
Standard Test Method for Determining Ignitibility of
Exterior Wall Assemblies Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source. . . . . . . . 1406.2.1, 1406.2.1.1, 1406.2.1.2, 2603.5.7, D105.1
Standard Method of Test for the Evaluation of Flammability Characteristics of
Exterior Nonload-bearingWall Assemblies Containing Combustible Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1407.10.4, 2603.5.5
Standard Method of Fire Test for Evaluating Contribution of Wall and
Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.16.4, 803.1.2, 803.1.2.1, 803.9, 2603.4, 2603.9
Standard Method of Fire Tests of Floor Fire Door Assemblies
Installed Horizontally in Fire-resistance-rated Floor Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.8
Aircraft Hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .412.4.6, Table 412.4.6, 412.4.6.1, 412.6.5
Standard for Heliports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .412.7.4
Combustible Metals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:44 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

NFPA—continued

Prevention of Fire & Dust Explosions from the Manufacturing,
Processing and Handling of Combustible Particulate Solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1
Prevention of Sulfur Fires and Explosions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .415.6.1
Prevention of Fires and Explosions in Wood Processing and Woodworking Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1
Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-propagation of Textiles and Films . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.12.1, 410.3.6, 801.1.4, 806.1,
806.1.2, 806.2, 3102.3, 3102.3.1,
3102.6.1.1, 3105.4, D102.2.8, H106.1.1
Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.7.2, 415.2
Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.3.1
Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.10

Precast Prestressed Concrete Institute
209 W. Jackson Boulevard, Suite 500
Chicago, IL 60606-6938

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Design for Fire Resistance of Precast Prestressed Concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.2.3.1
Recommended Practice for Glass Fiber Reinforced Concrete Panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1903.2

Post-Tensioning Institute
8601 North Black Canyon Highway, Suite 103
Phoenix, AZ 85021

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard Requirements for Analysis of Shallow Concrete Foundations on Expansive Soils, Third Edition . . . . . . . . . . 1808.6.2
Standard Requirements for Design of Shallow Post-tensioned Concrete Foundation on
Expansive Soils, Second Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1808.6.2

Rack Manufacturers Institute
8720 Red Oak Boulevard, Suite 201
Charlotte, NC 28217

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Specification for Design, Testing and Utilization of Industrial Steel Storage Racks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2208.1

Steel Deck Institute
P. O. Box 25
Fox River Grove, IL 60021

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard for Noncomposite Steel Floor Deck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2209.2.2, 2209.2.2.1
Standard for Steel Roof Deck. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2209.2.3

Steel Joist Institute
1173B London Links Drive
Forest, VA 24551

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Standard Specification for Composite Steel Joists, CJ-series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2206.1
Standard Specification for Joist Girders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2206.1
Standard Specification for Open Web Steel Joists, K-series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2206.1
Standard Specification for Longspan Steel Joists, LH-series
and Deep Longspan Steel Joists, DLH-series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2206.1

654—06

655—07
664—07
701—04

704—07
1124—06
2001—08

PCI

Standard
reference
number
MNL 124—89
MNL 128—01

PTI

Standard
reference
number
PTI—2007
PTI—2007

RMI

Standard
reference
number
ANSI/MH16.1—08

SDI

Standard
reference
number
ANSI/NC1.0—06
ANSI/RD1.0—06

SJI

Standard
reference
number
CJ-1.0—06
JG-1.1—05
K-1.1—05
LH/DLH-1.1—05

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

603

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:44 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

SPRI

Standard
reference
number
SPRI/ANSI/ES-1—03
RP-4—02

TIA

Standard
reference
number
TIA-222-G—05

TMS

Standard
reference
number
0216—97

0302—07
402—08

602—08

TPI

Standard
reference
number
TPI 1—2007

UL

Standard
reference
number
9—2000
10A—98
10B—97
10C—98
14B—98

14C—06
103—01

127—96

604

Single-Ply Roofing Institute
411 Waverly Oaks Road, Suite 331B
Waltham, MA 02452

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Wind Design Standard for Edge Systems Used with Low Slope Roofing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.5
Wind Design Guide for Ballasted Single-ply Roofing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.4

Telecommunications Industry Association
2500 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22201-3834

Title
Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures including-Addendum 1, 222-G-1, Dated 2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.1, 3108.1, 3108.2

Referenced
in code
section number

The Masonry Society
3970 Broadway, Unit 201-D
Boulder, CO 80304-1135

Referenced
in code
section number

Title
Standard Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and
Masonry Construction Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Table 720.1(2), 721.1
Standard Method for Determining the Sound Transmission Class Rating for Masonry Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1207.2.1
Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6, 1405.6.2, 1405.10, 1604.3.4, Table 1703.4.5.3,
1704.5, 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.1, 1704.5.2, 1704.5.3,
1807.1.6.3.2, 1808.9, 2101.2.2, 2101.2.3, 2101.2.4, 2101.2.5,
2101.2.6, 2103.1.3.6, 2106.1, 2107.1, 2107.2, 2107.3, 2107.4,
2107.5, 2108.1, 2108.2, 2108.3, 2109.1, 2109.1.1, 2109.2, 2109.2.1, 2109.3, 2110.1
Specification for Masonry Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6.1, Table 1704.5.1, Table 1704.5.3, 1807.1.6.3,
2103.8, 2103.11, 2103.12, 2103.13, 2104.1, 2104.1.1, 2104.1.2
2104.1.3, 2104.2, 2104.3, 2104.4, 2105.2.2.1.1, 2105.2.2.1.2, 2105.2.2.1.3

Truss Plate Institute
218 N. Lee Street, Suite 312
Alexandria, VA 22314

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
National Design Standards for Metal-plate-connected Wood Truss Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.4.6, 2306.1

Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Fire Tests of Window Assemblies—with Revisions through April 2005 . . . 715.3, 715.4.3.2, 715.5, 715.5.1, 715.5.2, 715.5.9.1
Tin Clad Fire Doors—with Revisions through March 2003. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4
Fire Tests of Door Assemblies—with Revisions through October 2001. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.2
Positive Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies—with Revisions through November 2001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.1, 715.4.3
Sliding Hardware for Standard Horizontally-mounted Tin Clad Fire Doors—
with Revisions through July 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .715.4
Swinging Hardware for Standard Tin Clad Fire Doors Mounted Singly and in Pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4
Factory-built Chimneys, for Residential Type and Building Heating Appliances—
with Revisions through June 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .717.2.5.1
Factory-built Fireplaces—with Revisions through November 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.5.1, 2111.11

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:45 PM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

UL—continued

Outline of Investigation for Fire Testing of Sprinklers and Water Spray Nozzles for
Protection of Deep Fat Fryers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .904.11.4.1
Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms—with Revisions through August 2005. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11
Standard for Fire Test of Building Construction and Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2, 703.2.1, 703.2.3, 703.3, 703.5,
704.12, 705.7, 707.7, 712.3.2, 713.3.1, 713.4.1.1,
714.1, 715.2, 716.5.2, 716.5.3, 716.6.1, Table 716.6.2(1),
Table 720.1(1), 1407.10.2, 2103.2, 2603.4, 2603.5.1
Smoke Detectors for Fire Protective Signaling Systems—with Revisions through January 1999 . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.7, 907.2.6.2
Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishing Systems for Protection of Restaurant Cooking Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 904.11
Panic Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1008.1.10
Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver and Window Operations and Systems—
with Revisions through February 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .406.1.5, 3110.4
Fire Dampers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .716.3
Ceiling Dampers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .716.3, 716.6.2
Smoke Dampers—with Revisions through July 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 716.3, 716.3.1.1
Test for Uplift Resistance of Roof Assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.3.1, 1504.3.2
Type L Low-temperature Venting Systems—with Revisions through August 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2113.11.1.4
Recirculating Systems—with Revisions through April 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 904.11
Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials—
with Revisions through May 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11, 402.16.4, 406.5.3, 703.4.2, 719.1,
719.4, 802.1, 803.1.1, 803.9, 806.5, 1407.9, 1407.10.1, 2303.2, 2603.3,
2603.4.1.13, 2603.5.4, 2604.2.4, 2606.4, 3105.4, D102.2.8
Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505.1, 2603.6, 2610.2, 2610.3
Standards for Automatically Operated Roof Vents for Smoke and Heat—
with Revisions through April 2004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .910.3.1
Standards for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems—
with Revisions through March 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .909.12
Standard for Safety Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.4
Fire Test of Insulated Wall Construction—with Revisions through June 2001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1407.10.3, 2603.4, 2603.9
Fire Test of Roof Deck Construction—with Revisions through January 2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . l508.1, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.5
Fire Tests of Through-penetration Firestops—with Revisions through April 2007 . . . . . . .702.1, 713.3.1.2, 713.3.2, 713.4.1.1.2
Solid-fuel-type Room Heater—with Revisions through November 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2112.2, 2112.5
Fire Test of Interior Finish Material—with Revisions through March 2004 . . . . . . . . . . . . 1407.10.2, 1407.10.3, 2603.4, 2603.9
Chimney Liners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2113.11.1, 2113.19
Air Leakage Tests of Door Assemblies—with Revisions through December 2004. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14.1, 711.5.2,
715.4.3.1, 715.4.6.1, 715.4.6.3, 3007.4.3
Uplift Tests for Roof Covering Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1504.3.1
Fire Test of Foamed Plastics Used for Decorative Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11, 402.12.1, 402.16.5
Standard for Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems—with Revisions through February 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.7, 1024.2.1,
1024.2.3, 1024.2.4, 1024.4

Standards for General-purpose Signaling Devices and Systems—
with Revisions through August 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3109.4.1.8
Tests for Fire Resistance of Building Joint Systems—with Revisions through March 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 702.1, 714.3, 714.6
Stationary Engine Generator Assemblies—with Revisions through July 2004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.1.1

199E—04

217—06
263—03

268—06
300—05
305—07
325—02

555—2006
555C—2006
555S—99
580—2006
641—95
710B—04
723—03

790—04
793—03

864—03

924—06
1040—96
1256—02
1479—03
1482—96
1715—97
1777—04
1784—01

1897—04
1975—06
1994—04

2017—2000

2079—04
2200—04

ULC

Standard
reference
number
CAN/ULC S102.2—1988

Underwriters Laboratories of Canada
7 Underwriters Road
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M1R3B4

Title
Standard Method of Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Flooring,
Floor Coverings and Miscellaneous Materials and Assemblies—with 2000 Revisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.4

Referenced
in code
section number

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

605

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:45 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

REFERENCED STANDARDS

USC

Standard
reference
number
18 USC Part 1, Ch.40

WDMA

Standard
reference
number
AAMA/WDMA/CSA
101/I.S.2/A440—08

WRI

Standard
reference
number
WRI/CRSI—81

United States Code
c/o Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, DC 20402-9325

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Importation, Manufacture, Distribution and Storage of Explosive Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2

Window and Door Manufacturers Association
1400 East Touhy Avenue #470
Des Plaines, IL 60018

Title

Referenced
in code
section number

Specifications for Windows, Doors and Unit Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5.1, 2405.5

Wire Reinforcement Institute, Inc.
942 Main Street, Suite 300
Hartford, CT 06103

Referenced
in code
Title
section number
Design of Slab-on-ground Foundations—with 1996 Update. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.6.2

606

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

35_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:29)_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 2:35:45 PM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX A

EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION A101
BUILDING OFFICIAL QUALIFICATIONS

A101.1 Building official. The building official shall have at
least 10 years’ experience or equivalent as an architect, engi-
neer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or
any combination of these, five years of which shall have been
supervisory experience. The building official should be certi-
fied as a building official through a recognized certification
program. The building official shall be appointed or hired by
the applicable governing authority.
A101.2 Chief inspector. The building official can designate
supervisors to administer the provisions of the International
Building, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes and International
Fuel Gas Code. Each supervisor shall have at least 10 years’
experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector,
contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combina-
tion of these, five years of which shall have been in a supervi-
sory capacity. They shall be certified through a recognized
certification program for the appropriate trade.
A101.3 Inspector and plans examiner. The building official
shall appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assis-
tants and other employees as shall be authorized by the juris-
diction. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector of
construction or plans examiner who has not had at least 5 years’
experience as a contractor, engineer, architect, or as a superin-
tendent, foreman or competent mechanic in charge of construc-
tion. The inspector or plans examiner shall be certified through
a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade.
A101.4 Termination of employment. Employees in the posi-
tion of building official, chief inspector or inspector shall not be
removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has
been given to be heard on specific charges before such applica-
ble governing authority.

SECTION A102
REFERENCED STANDARDS

IBC—09

International Building Code

A101.2

IMC—09

International Mechanical Code

A101.2

IPC—09

International Plumbing Code

IFGC—09

International Fuel Gas Code

A101.2

A101.2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

607

36_appA_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:30)_appA_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:04:16 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

608

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

36_appA_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:30)_appA_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:04:16 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX B

BOARD OF APPEALS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

B101.2.4 Chairperson. The board shall annually select one
of its members to serve as chairperson.
B101.2.5 Disqualification of member. A member shall not
hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, profes-
sional or financial interest.
B101.2.6 Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall
designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board.
The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings
in the office of the chief administrative officer.
B101.2.7 Compensation of members. Compensation of
members shall be determined by law.
B101.3 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice
from the chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal
or at stated periodic meetings.
B101.3.1 Open hearing. All hearings before the board
shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s
representative, the building official and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
B101.3.2 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make avail-
able to the public through the secretary procedures under
which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall
mandate that only relevant information be received.
B101.3.3 Postponed hearing. When five members are not
present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appel-
lant’s representative shall have the right to request a post-
ponement of the hearing.
B101.4 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the
decision of the building official by a concurring vote of
two-thirds of its members.
B101.4.1 Resolution. The decision of the board shall be by
resolution. Certified copies shall be furnished to the appel-
lant and to the building official.
B101.4.2 Administration. The building official shall take
immediate action in accordance with the decision of the
board.

SECTION B101
GENERAL

B101.1 Application. The application for appeal shall be filed
on a form obtained from the building official within 20 days
after the notice was served.
B101.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall
consist of persons appointed by the chief appointing authority
as follows:
1. One for five years; one for four years; one for three years;
one for two years; and one for one year.
2. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years
or until a successor has been appointed.
The building official shall be an ex officio member of said
board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board.
B101.2.1 Alternate members. The chief appointing
authority shall appoint two alternate members who shall be
called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate mem-
bers shall possess the qualifications required for board
membership and shall be appointed for five years, or until a
successor has been appointed.
B101.2.2 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist
of five individuals, one from each of the following profes-
sions or disciplines:
1. Registered design professional with architectural
experience or a builder or superintendent of building
construction with at least ten years’ experience, five
of which shall have been in responsible charge of
work.
2. Registered design professional with structural engi-
neering experience
3. Registered design professional with mechanical and
plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical
contractor with at least ten years’ experience, five of
which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
4. Registered design professional with electrical engi-
neering experience or an electrical contractor with at
least ten years’ experience, five of which shall have
been in responsible charge of work.
5. Registered design professional with fire protection
engineering experience or a fire protection contractor
with at least ten years’ experience, five of which shall
have been in responsible charge of work.
B101.2.3 Rules and procedures. The board is authorized
to establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out
its duties.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

609

37_appB_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:31)_appB_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:08:15 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

610

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

37_appB_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:31)_appB_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:08:15 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX C

GROUP U–AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION C101
GENERAL

C101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall apply
exclusively to agricultural buildings. Such buildings shall be
classified as Group U and shall include the following uses:
1. Livestock shelters or buildings, including shade struc-
tures and milking barns.
2. Poultry buildings or shelters.
3. Barns.
4. Storage of equipment and machinery used exclusively in
agriculture.
5. Horticultural structures, including detached production
greenhouses and crop protection shelters.
6. Sheds.
7. Grain silos.
8. Stables.

SECTION C102
ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND AREA

C102.1 General. Buildings classified as Group U Agricultural
shall not exceed the area or height limits specified in Table
C102.1.
C102.2 One-story unlimited area. The area of a one-story
Group U agricultural building shall not be limited if the build-

ing is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less
than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

C102.3 Two-story unlimited area. The area of a two-story
Group U agricultural building shall not be limited if the build-
ing is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less
than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width and is provided with an
approved automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1.

SECTION C103
MIXED OCCUPANCIES

C103.1 Mixed occupancies. Mixed occupancies shall be pro-
tected in accordance with Section 508.

SECTION C104
EXITS

C104.1 Exit facilities. Exits shall be provided in accordance
with Chapters 10 and 11.

Exceptions:
1. The maximum travel distance from any point in the
building to an approved exit shall not exceed 300 feet (91
440 mm).
2. One exit is required for each 15,000 square feet (1393.5
m2) of area or fraction thereof.

TABLE C102.1—BASIC ALLOWABLE AREA FOR A GROUP U,
ONE STORY IN HEIGHT AND MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SUCH OCCUPANCY

I

II

III and IV

V

A

B

A

B

III A and IV

III B

A

B

ALLOWABLE AREA (square feet)a

Unlimited

60,000

27,100

18,000

27,100

18,000

21,100

12,000

Unlimited

Unlimited

12

160

4

65

MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN STORIES

2

4

MAXIMUM HEIGHT IN FEET

55

65

2

55

3

50

2

40

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.
a. See Section C102 for unlimited area under certain conditions.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

611

38_appC_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)8_appC_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:08:51 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

612

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

38_appC_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)8_appC_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:08:51 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX D

FIRE DISTRICTS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION D101
GENERAL

D101.1 Scope. The fire district shall include such territory or
portion as outlined in an ordinance or law entitled “An Ordi-
nance (Resolution) Creating and Establishing a Fire District.”
Wherever, in such ordinance creating and establishing a fire
district, reference is made to the fire district, it shall be con-
strued to mean the fire district designated and referred to in this
appendix.
D101.1.1 Mapping. The fire district complying with the
provisions of Section D101.1 shall be shown on a map that
shall be available to the public.
D101.2 Establishment of area. For the purpose of this code,
the fire district shall include that territory or area as described in
Sections D101.2.1 through D101.2.3.
D101.2.1 Adjoining blocks. Two or more adjoining blocks,
exclusive of intervening streets, where at least 50 percent of
the ground area is built upon and more than 50 percent of the
built-on area is devoted to hotels and motels of Group R-1;
Group B occupancies; theaters, nightclubs, restaurants of
Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies; garages, express and
freight depots, warehouses and storage buildings used for
the storage of finished products (not located with and form-
ing a part of a manufactured or industrial plant); or Group S
occupancy. Where the average height of a building is two
and one-half stories or more, a block should be considered if
the ground area built upon is at least 40 percent.
D101.2.2 Buffer zone. Where four contiguous blocks or
more comprise a fire district, there shall be a buffer zone of
200 feet (60 960 mm) around the perimeter of such district.
Streets, rights-of-way and other open spaces not subject to
building construction can be included in the 200-foot (60
960 mm) buffer zone.
D101.2.3 Developed blocks. Where blocks adjacent to the
fire district have developed to the extent that at least 25 per-
cent of the ground area is built upon and 40 percent or more
of the built-on area is devoted to the occupancies specified
in Section D101.2.1, they can be considered for inclusion in
the fire district, and can form all or a portion of the 200-foot
(60 960 mm) buffer zone required in Section D101.2.2.

SECTION D102
BUILDING RESTRICTIONS
D102.1 Types of construction permitted. Within the fire dis-
trict every building hereafter erected shall be either Type I, II,
III or IV, except as permitted in Section D104.

D102.2 Other specific requirements.
D102.2.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings
located in the fire district shall comply with the require-
ments in Table 601 except as required in Section D102.2.6.
D102.2.2 Group H prohibited. Group H occupancies shall
be prohibited from location within the fire district.
D102.2.3 Construction type. Every building shall be con-
structed as required based on the type of construction indi-
cated in Chapter 6.
D102.2.4 Roof covering. Roof covering in the fire district
shall conform to the requirements of Class A or B roof cov-
erings as defined in Section 1505.
D102.2.5 Structural fire rating. Walls, floors, roofs and
their supporting structural members shall be a minimum of
1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings of Type IV construction.
2 Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1.
3. Automobile parking structures.
4. Buildings surrounded on all sides by a permanently
open space of not less than 30 feet (9144 mm).
5. Partitions complying with Section 603.1, Item 10.
D102.2.6 Exterior walls. Exterior load-bearing walls of
Type II buildings shall have a fire-resistance rating of 2
hours or more where such walls are located within 30 feet
(9144 mm) of a common property line or an assumed prop-
erty line. Exterior nonload-bearing walls of Type II build-
ings located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of a common
property line or an assumed property line shall have
fireresistance ratings as required by Table 601, but not less
than 1 hour. Exterior walls located more than 30 feet (9144
mm) from a common property line or an assumed property
line shall comply with Table 601.
Exception: In the case of one-story buildings that are
2,000 square feet (186 m2) or less in area, exterior walls
located more than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a common
property line or an assumed property line need only com-
ply with Table 601.
D102.2.7 Architectural trim. Architectural trim on build-
ings located in the fire district shall be constructed of
approved noncombustible materials or
fire-retardant-
treated wood.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

613

39_appD_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)9_appD_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:00 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX D

D102.2.8 Permanent canopies. Permanent canopies are
permitted to extend over adjacent open spaces provided all
of the following are met:
1. The canopy and its supports shall be of noncombusti-
ble material, fire-retardant-treated wood, Type IV
construction or of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated con-
struction.
Exception: Any textile covering for the canopy
shall be flame resistant as determined by tests con-
ducted in accordance with NFPA 701 after both
accelerated water leaching and accelerated weath-
ering.
2. Any canopy covering, other than textiles, shall have a
flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in
accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723 in the form
intended for use.
3. The canopy shall have at least one long side open.
4. The maximum horizontal width of the canopy shall
not exceed 15 feet (4572 mm).
5. The fire resistance of exterior walls shall not be
reduced.
D102.2.9 Roof structures. Structures, except aerial sup-
ports 12 feet (3658 mm) high or less, flagpoles, water tanks
and cooling towers, placed above the roof of any building
within the fire district shall be of noncombustible material
and shall be supported by construction of noncombustible
material.
D102.2.10 Plastic signs. The use of plastics complying
with Section 2611 for signs is permitted provided the struc-
ture of the sign in which the plastic is mounted or installed is
noncombustible.
D102.2.11 Plastic veneer. Exterior plastic veneer is not per-
mitted in the fire district.

SECTION D103
CHANGES TO BUILDINGS
D103.1 Existing buildings within the fire district. An exist-
ing building shall not hereafter be increased in height or area
unless it is of a type of construction permitted for new buildings
within the fire district or is altered to comply with the require-
ments for such type of construction. Nor shall any existing
building be hereafter extended on any side, nor square footage
or floors added within the existing building unless such modifi-
cations are of a type of construction permitted for new build-
ings within the fire district.
D103.2 Other alterations. Nothing in Section D103.1 shall
prohibit other alterations within the fire district provided there
is no change of occupancy that is otherwise prohibited and the
fire hazard is not increased by such alteration.
D103.3 Moving buildings. Buildings shall not hereafter be
moved into the fire district or to another lot in the fire district

unless the building is of a type of construction permitted in the
fire district.

SECTION D104
BUILDINGS LOCATED PARTIALLY
IN THE FIRE DISTRICT

D104.1 General. Any building located partially in the fire dis-
trict shall be of a type of construction required for the fire dis-
trict, unless the major portion of such building lies outside of
the fire district and no part is more than 10 feet (3048 mm)
inside the boundaries of the fire district.

SECTION D105
EXCEPTIONS TO RESTRICTIONS
IN FIRE DISTRICT

D105.1 General. The preceding provisions of this appendix
shall not apply in the following instances:
1. Temporary buildings used in connection with duly
authorized construction.
2. A private garage used exclusively as such, not more
than one story in height, nor more than 650 square feet
(60 m2) in area, located on the same lot with a dwelling.
3. Fences not over 8 feet (2438 mm) high.
4. Coal tipples, material bins and trestles of Type IV con-
struction.
5. Water tanks and cooling towers conforming to Sections
1509.3 and 1509.4.
6. Greenhouses less than 15 feet (4572 mm) high.
7. Porches on dwellings not over one story in height, and
not over 10 feet (3048 mm) wide from the face of the
building, provided such porch does not come within 5
feet (1524 mm) of any property line.
8. Sheds open on a long side not over 15 feet (4572 mm)
high and 500 square feet (46 m2) in area.
9. One- and two-family dwellings where of a type of con-
struction not permitted in the fire district can be
extended 25 percent of the floor area existing at the
time of inclusion in the fire district by any type of con-
struction permitted by this code.
10. Wood decks less than 600 square feet (56 m2) where
constructed of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal wood, pressure
treated for exterior use.
11. Wood veneers on exterior walls conforming to Section
1405.5.
12. Exterior plastic veneer complying with Section 2605.2
where installed on exterior walls required to have a
fire-resistance rating not less than 1 hour, provided the
exterior plastic veneer does not exhibit sustained flam-
ing as defined in NFPA 268.

614

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

39_appD_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)9_appD_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:00 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX D

SECTION D106
REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASTM E 84-04 Test Method for Surface
Burning Characteristics of
Building Materials

NFPA 268-01

Test Method for Determining
Ignitability of Exterior Wall
Assemblies Using a Radiant
Heat Energy Source

NFPA 701-99 Methods of Fire Tests for
Flame-Propagation of Textiles
and Films

UL 723-03

Standard for Test for
Surface Burning Characteristics of
Building Materials, with Revisions
through May 2005

D102.2.8

D105.1

D102.2.8

D102.2.8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

615

39_appD_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)9_appD_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:00 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

616

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

39_appD_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo (cid:3)9_appD_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:00 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

APPENDIX E

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION E101
GENERAL

E101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall control
the supplementary requirements for the design and construc-
tion of facilities for accessibility to physically disabled per-
sons.
E101.2 Design. Technical requirements for items herein shall
comply with this code and ICC A117.1.

SECTION E102
DEFINITIONS

E102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT TELEPHONE. A telephone with a
dedicated line such as a house phone, courtesy phone or phone
that must be used to gain entrance to a facility.
MAILBOXES. Receptacles for the receipt of documents,
packages or other deliverable matter. Mailboxes include, but
are not limited to, post office boxes and receptacles provided by
commercial mail-receiving agencies, apartment houses and
schools.
TRANSIENT LODGING. A building, facility or portion
thereof , exclud ing inpatien t med ical care facilities and
long-term care facilities, that contains one or more dwelling
units or sleeping units. Examples of transient lodging include,
but are not limited to, resorts, group homes, hotels, motels, dor-
mitories, homeless shelters, halfway houses and social service
lodging.

SECTION E103
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

E103.1 Raised platforms. In banquet rooms or spaces where a
head table or speaker’s lectern is located on a raised platform,
an accessible route shall be provided to the platform.

SECTION E104
SPECIAL OCCUPANCIES

E104.1 General. Transient lodging facilities shall be provided
with accessible features in accordance with Sections E104.2
and E104.3. Group I-3 occupancies shall be provided with
accessible features in accordance with Sections E104.3 and
E104.4.

E104.2 Accessible beds. In rooms or spaces having more than
25 beds, 5 percent of the beds shall have a clear floor space
complying with ICC A117.1.
E104.2.1 Sleeping areas. A clear floor space complying
with ICC A117.1 shall be provided on both sides of the
accessible bed. The clear floor space shall be positioned for
parallel approach to the side of the bed.
Exception: This requirement shall not apply where a
single clear floor space complying with ICC A117.1
positioned for parallel approach is provided between two
beds.
E104.3 Communication features. Communication features
complying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided in accordance
with Sections E104.3.1 through E104.3.4.
E104.3.1 Transient lodging. In transient lodging facilities,
sleeping units with accessible communication features shall
be provided in accordance with Table E104.3.1. Units
required to comply with Table E104.3.1 shall be dispersed
among the various classes of units.
E104.3.2 Group I-3. In Group I-3 occupancies at least 2
percent, but no fewer than one of the total number of general
holding cells and general housing cells equipped with audi-
ble emergency alarm systems and permanently installed
telephones within the cell, shall comply with Section
E104.3.4.
E104.3.3 Dwelling units and sleeping units. Where dwell-
ing units and sleeping units are altered or added, the require-
ments of Section E104.3 shall apply only to the units being
altered or added until the number of units with accessible
communication features complies with the minimum num-
ber required for new construction.
E104.3.4 Notification devices. Visual notification devices
shall be provided to alert room occupants of incoming tele-
phone calls and a door knock or bell. Notification devices
shall not be connected to visual alarm signal appliances.
Permanently installed telephones shall have volume con-
trols and an electrical outlet complying with ICC A117.1
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of the telephone to
facilitate the use of a TTY.
E104.4 Partitions. Solid partitions or security glazing that
separates visitors from detainees in Group I-3 occupancies
shall provide a method to facilitate voice communication. Such
methods are permitted to include, but are not limited to, grilles,
slats, talk-through baffles, intercoms or telephone handset

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

617

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:37 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

APPENDIX E

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION E101
GENERAL

E101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall control
the supplementary requirements for the design and construc-
tion of facilities for accessibility to physically disabled per-
sons.
E101.2 Design. Technical requirements for items herein shall
comply with this code and ICC A117.1.

SECTION E102
DEFINITIONS

E102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT TELEPHONE. A telephone with a
dedicated line such as a house phone, courtesy phone or phone
that must be used to gain entrance to a facility.
MAILBOXES. Receptacles for the receipt of documents,
packages or other deliverable matter. Mailboxes include, but
are not limited to, post office boxes and receptacles provided by
commercial mail-receiving agencies, apartment houses and
schools.
TRANSIENT LODGING. A building, facility or portion
thereof , exclud ing inpatien t med ical care facilities and
long-term care facilities, that contains one or more dwelling
units or sleeping units. Examples of transient lodging include,
but are not limited to, resorts, group homes, hotels, motels, dor-
mitories, homeless shelters, halfway houses and social service
lodging.

SECTION E103
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

E103.1 Raised platforms. In banquet rooms or spaces where a
head table or speaker’s lectern is located on a raised platform,
an accessible route shall be provided to the platform.

SECTION E104
SPECIAL OCCUPANCIES

E104.1 General. Transient lodging facilities shall be provided
with accessible features in accordance with Sections E104.2
and E104.3. Group I-3 occupancies shall be provided with
accessible features in accordance with Sections E104.3 and
E104.4.

E104.2 Accessible beds. In rooms or spaces having more than
25 beds, 5 percent of the beds shall have a clear floor space
complying with ICC A117.1.
E104.2.1 Sleeping areas. A clear floor space complying
with ICC A117.1 shall be provided on both sides of the
accessible bed. The clear floor space shall be positioned for
parallel approach to the side of the bed.
Exception: This requirement shall not apply where a
single clear floor space complying with ICC A117.1
positioned for parallel approach is provided between two
beds.
E104.3 Communication features. Communication features
complying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided in accordance
with Sections E104.3.1 through E104.3.4.
E104.3.1 Transient lodging. In transient lodging facilities,
sleeping units with accessible communication features shall
be provided in accordance with Table E104.3.1. Units
required to comply with Table E104.3.1 shall be dispersed
among the various classes of units.
E104.3.2 Group I-3. In Group I-3 occupancies at least 2
percent, but no fewer than one of the total number of general
holding cells and general housing cells equipped with audi-
ble emergency alarm systems and permanently installed
telephones within the cell, shall comply with Section
E104.3.4.
E104.3.3 Dwelling units and sleeping units. Where dwell-
ing units and sleeping units are altered or added, the require-
ments of Section E104.3 shall apply only to the units being
altered or added until the number of units with accessible
communication features complies with the minimum num-
ber required for new construction.
E104.3.4 Notification devices. Visual notification devices
shall be provided to alert room occupants of incoming tele-
phone calls and a door knock or bell. Notification devices
shall not be connected to visual alarm signal appliances.
Permanently installed telephones shall have volume con-
trols and an electrical outlet complying with ICC A117.1
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of the telephone to
facilitate the use of a TTY.
E104.4 Partitions. Solid partitions or security glazing that
separates visitors from detainees in Group I-3 occupancies
shall provide a method to facilitate voice communication. Such
methods are permitted to include, but are not limited to, grilles,
slats, talk-through baffles, intercoms or telephone handset

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

617

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:37 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX E

devices. The method of communication shall be accessible to
individuals who use wheelchairs and individuals who have dif-
ficulty bending or stooping. Hand-operable communication
devices, if provided, shall comply with Section E106.3.

SECTION E105
OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES
E105.1 Portable toilets and bathing rooms. Where multiple
single-user portable toilet or bathing units are clustered at a sin-
gle location, at least 5 percent, but not less than one toilet unit or
bathing unit at each cluster, shall comply with ICC A117.1.
Signs containing the International Symbol of Accessibility and
complying with ICC A117.1 shall identify accessible portable
toilets and bathing units.
Exception: Portable toilet units provided for use exclu-
sively by construction personnel on a construction site.
E105.2 Laundry equipment. Where provided in spaces
required to be accessible, washing machines and clothes dryers
shall comply with this section.
E105.2.1 Washing machines. Where three or fewer wash-
ing machines are provided, at least one shall comply with
ICC A117.1. Where more than three washing machines are
provided, at least two shall comply with ICC A117.1.
E105.2.2 Clothes dryers. Where three or fewer clothes
dryers are provided, at least one shall comply with ICC
A117.1. Where more than three clothes dryers are provided,
at least two shall comply with ICC A117.1.
E105.3 Depositories, vending machines, change machines
and similar equipment. Where provided, at least one of each
type of depository, vending machine, change machine and sim-
ilar equipment shall comply with ICC A117.1.
Exception: Drive-up-only depositories are not required to
comply with this section.

E105.4 Mailboxes. Where mailboxes are provided in an inte-
rior location, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of each
type shall comply with ICC A117.1. In residential and institu-
tional facilities, where mailboxes are provided for each dwell-
ing unit or sleeping unit, mailboxes complying with ICC
A117.1 shall be provided for each unit required to be an Acces-
sible unit.

E105.5 Automatic teller machines and fare machines.
Where automatic teller machines or self-service fare vending,
collection or adjustment machines are provided, at least one
machine of each type at each location where such machines are
provided shall be accessible. Where bins are provided for enve-
lopes, wastepaper or other purposes, at least one of each type
shall be accessible.
E105.6 Two-way communication systems. Where two-way
communication systems are provided to gain admittance to a
building or facility or to restricted areas within a building or
facility, the system shall comply with ICC A117.1.

SECTION E106
TELEPHONES

E106.1 General. Where coin-operated public pay telephones,
coinless public pay telephones, public closed-circuit tele-
phones, courtesy phones or other types of public telephones are
provided, accessible public telephones shall be provided in
accordance with Sections E106.2 through E106.5 for each type
of public telephone provided. For purposes of this section, a
bank of telephones shall be considered two or more adjacent
telephones.
E106.2 Wheelchair-accessible telephones. Where public
telephones are provided, wheelchair-accessible telephones
complying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided in accordance
with Table E106.2.
Exception: Drive-up-only public telephones are not
required to be accessible.

TABLE E104.3.1
DWELLING OR SLEEPING UNITS WITH ACCESSIBLE COMMUNICATION FEATURES

TOTAL NUMBER OF DWELLING OR
SLEEPING UNITS PROVIDED

MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF DWELLING OR SLEEPING
UNITS WITH ACCESSIBLE COMMUNICATION FEATURES

1

2 to 25

26 to 50

51 to 75

76 to 100

101 to 150

151 to 200

201 to 300

301 to 400

401 to 500

501 to 1,000

1,001 and over

1

2

4

7

9

12

14

17

20

22

5% of total

50 plus 3 for each 100 over 1,000

618

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:37 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX E

TABLE E106.2
WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE TELEPHONES

NUMBER OF TELEPHONES PROVIDED
ON A FLOOR, LEVEL OR EXTERIOR SITE

1 or more single unit

1 bank

2 or more banks

MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF
WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE TELEPHONES

1 per floor, level and exterior site

1 per floor, level and exterior site

1 per bank

E106.3 Volume controls. All public telephones provided shall
have volume control complying with ICC A117.1.
E106.4 TTYs. TTYs complying with ICC A117.1 shall be pro-
vided in accordance with Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.9.
E106.4.1 Bank requirement. Where four or more public
pay telephones are provided at a bank of telephones, at least
one public TTY shall be provided at that bank.
Exception: TTYs are not required at banks of telephones
located within 200 feet (60 960 mm) of, and on the same
floor as, a bank containing a public TTY.
E106.4.2 Floor requirement. Where four or more public
pay telephones are provided on a floor of a privately owned
building, at least one public TTY shall be provided on that
floor. Where at least one public pay telephone is provided on
a floor of a publicly owned building, at least one public TTY
shall be provided on that floor.
E106.4.3 Building requirement. Where four or more pub-
lic pay telephones are provided in a privately owned build-
ing, at least one public TTY shall be provided in the
building. Where at least one public pay telephone is pro-
vided in a publicly owned building, at least one public TTY
shall be provided in the building.
E106.4.4 Site requirement. Where four or more public pay
telephones are provided on a site, at least one public TTY
shall be provided on the site.
E106.4.5 Rest stops, emergency road stops, and service
plazas. Where a public pay telephone is provided at a public
rest stop, emergency road stop or service plaza, at least one
public TTY shall be provided.
E106.4.6 Hospitals. Where a public pay telephone is pro-
vided in or adjacent to a hospital emergency room, hospital
recovery room or hospital waiting room, at least one public
TTY shall be provided at each such location.
E106.4.7 Transportation facilities. Transportation facili-
ties shall be provided with TTYs in accordance with Sec-
tions E109.2.5 and E110.2 in addition to the TTYs required
by Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.4.
E106.4.8 Detention and correctional facilities. In deten-
tion and correctional facilities, where a public pay telephone
is provided in a secured area used only by detainees or
inmates and security personnel, then at least one TTY shall
be provided in at least one secured area.
E106.4.9 Signs. Public TTYs shall be identified by the
International Symbol of TTY complying with ICC A117.1.
Directional signs indicating the location of the nearest pub-

lic TTY shall be provided at banks of public pay telephones
not containing a public TTY. Additionally, where signs pro-
vide direction to public pay telephones, they shall also pro-
vide direction to public TTYs. Such signs shall comply with
ICC A117.1 and shall include the International Symbol of
TTY.
E106.5 Shelves for portable TTYs. Where a bank of tele-
phones in the interior of a building consists of three or more
public pay telephones, at least one public pay telephone at the
bank shall be provided with a shelf and an electrical outlet in
accordance with ICC A117.1.
Exceptions:
1. In secured areas of detention and correctional facili-
ties, if shelves and outlets are prohibited for purposes
of security or safety shelves and outlets for TTYs are
not required to be provided.
2. The shelf and electrical outlet shall not be required at
a bank of telephones with a TTY.

SECTION E107
SIGNAGE

E107.1 Signs. Required accessible portable toilets and bathing
facilities shall be identified by the International Symbol of
Accessibility.
E107.2 Designations. Interior and exterior signs identifying
p e rm a n e n t r o om s an d s p a c e s s h a l l b e t a c t i l e . W h e r e
pictograms are provided as designations of interior rooms and
spaces, the pictograms shall have tactile text descriptors. Signs
required to provide tactile characters and pictograms shall
comply with ICC A117.1.
Exceptions:
1. Exterior signs that are not located at the door to the
space they serve are not required to comply.
2. Building directories, menus, seat and row designa-
tions in assembly areas, occupant names, building
addresses and company names and logos are not
required to comply.
3. Signs in parking facilities are not required to comply.
4. Temporary (seven days or less) signs are not required
to comply.
5. In detention and correctional facilities, signs not
located in public areas are not required to comply.
E107.3 Directional and informational signs. Signs that pro-
vide direction to, or information about, permanent interior

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

619

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:38 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX E

spaces of the site and facilities shall contain visual characters
complying with ICC A117.1.
Exception: Building directories, personnel names, com-
pany or occupant names and logos, menus and temporary
(seven days or less) signs are not required to comply with
ICC A117.1.
E107.4 Other signs. Signage indicating special accessibility
provisions shall be provided as follows:
1. At bus stops and terminals, signage must be provided in
accordance with Section E108.4.
2. At fixed facilities and stations, signage must be provided
i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n s E 1 0 9 . 2 . 2 t h r o u g h
E109.2.2.3.
3. At airports, terminal information systems must be pro-
vided in accordance with Section E110.3.

SECTION E108
BUS STOPS

E108.1 General. Bus stops shall comply with Sections E108.2
through E108.5.
E108.2 Bus boarding and alighting areas. Bus boarding and
alighting areas shall comply with Sections E108.2.1 through
E108.2.4.
E108.2.1 Surface. Bus boarding and alighting areas shall
have a firm, stable surface.
E108.2.2 Dimensions. Bus boarding and alighting areas
shall have a clear length of 96 inches (2440 mm) minimum,
measured perpendicular to the curb or vehicle roadway
edge, and a clear width of 60 inches (1525 mm) minimum,
measured parallel to the vehicle roadway.
E108.2.3 Connection. Bus boarding and alighting areas
shall be connected to streets, sidewalks or pedestrian paths
by an accessible route complying with Section 1104.
E108.2.4 Slope. Parallel to the roadway, the slope of the bus
boarding and alighting area shall be the same as the road-
way, to the maximum extent practicable. For water drain-
age, a maximum slope of 1:48 perpendicular to the roadway
is allowed.
E108.3 Bus shelters. Where provided, new or replaced bus
shelters shall provide a minimum clear floor or ground space
complying with ICC A117.1, Section 305, entirely within the
shelter. Such shelters shall be connected by an accessible route
to the boarding area required by Section E108.2.
E108.4 Signs. New bus route identification signs shall have
finish and contrast complying with ICC A117.1. Additionally,
to the maximum extent practicable, new bus route identifica-
tion signs shall provide visual characters complying with ICC
A117.1.
Exception: Bus schedules, timetables and maps that are
posted at the bus stop or bus bay are not required to meet this
requirement.
E108.5 Bus stop siting. Bus stop sites shall be chosen such
that, to the maximum extent practicable, the areas where lifts or

ramps are to be deployed comply with Sections E108.2 and
E108.3.

SECTION E109
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES AND STATIONS

E109.1 General. Fixed transportation facilities and stations
shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section E109.2.
E109.2 New construction. New stations in rapid rail, light rail,
commuter rail, intercity rail, high speed rail and other fixed
guideway systems shall comply with Sections E109.2.1
through E109.2.8.
E109.2.1 Station entrances. Where different entrances to a
station serve different transportation fixed routes or groups
of fixed routes, at least one entrance serving each group or
route shall comply with Section 1104 and ICC A117.1.
E109.2.2 Signs. Signage in fixed transportation facilities
and stations shall comply with Sections E109.2.2.1 through
E109.2.2.3.
E109.2.2.1 Tactile signs. Where signs are provided at
entrances to stations identifying the station or the
entrance, or both, at least one sign at each entrance shall
be tactile. A minimum of one tactile sign identifying the
specific station shall be provided on each platform or
boarding area. Such signs shall be placed in uniform
locations at entrances and on platforms or boarding areas
within the transit system to the maximum extent practi-
cable. Tactile signs shall comply with ICC A117.1.
Exceptions:
1. Where the station has no defined entrance but
signs are provided, the tactile signs shall be
placed in a central location.
2. Signs are not required to be tactile where audi-
ble signs are remotely transmitted to hand-held
receivers, or are user or proximity actuated.
E109.2.2.2 Identification signs. Stations covered by
this section shall have identification signs containing
visual characters complying with ICC A117.1. Signs
shall be clearly visible and within the sightlines of a
standing or sitting passenger from within the train on
both sides when not obstructed by another train.
E109.2.2.3 Informational signs. Lists of stations,
routes and destinations served by the station which are
located on boarding areas, platforms or mezzanines shall
provide visual characters complying with ICC A117.1
Signs covered by this provision shall, to the maximum
extent practicable, be placed in uniform locations within
the transit system.
E109.2.3 Fare machines. Self-service fare vending, collec-
tion and adjustment machines shall comply with ICC
A117.1, Section 707. Where self-service fare vending, col-
lection or adjustment machines are provided for the use of
the general public, at least one accessible machine of each
type provided shall be provided at each accessible point of
entry and exit.

620

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:38 PM

4

APPENDIX E

E109.2.4

SECTION E111
REFERENCED STANDARDS

DOJ 36
Americans with Disabilities Act
CFR Part 1192 (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines
for Transportation Vehicles
(ADAAG). Washington, D.C.:
Department of Justice, 1991

ICC/ANSI
A117.1-03

Accessible and Usable
Buildings and Facilities

E101.2, E104.2,
E104.2.1, E104.3,
E104.3.4, E105.1,
E105.2.1, E105.2.2,
E105.3, E105.4,
E105.6, E106.2,
E106.3, E106.4,
E106.4.9, E106.5,
E107.2, E107.3,
E108.3, E108.4,
E109.2.1, E109.2.2.1,
E109.2.2.2, E109.2.2.3,
E109.2.3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

E109.2.4 Rail-to-platform height. Station platforms shall
be positioned to coordinate with vehicles in accordance
with the applicable provisions of 36 CFR, Part 1192.
Low-level platforms shall be 8 inches (250 mm) minimum
above top of rail.
Exception: Where vehicles are boarded from sidewalks
or street level, low-level platforms shall be permitted to
be less than 8 inches (250 mm).
E109.2.5 TTYs. Where a public pay telephone is provided
in a transit facility (as defined by the Department of Trans-
portation) at least one public TTY complying with ICC
A117.1, Section 704.4, shall be provided in the station. In
addition, where one or more public pay telephones serve a
particular entrance to a transportation facility, at least one
TTY telephone complying with ICC A117.1, Section 704.4,
shall be provided to serve that entrance.
E109.2.6 Track crossings. Where a circulation path serv-
ing boarding platforms crosses tracks, an accessible route
complying with ICC A117.1 shall be provided.
Exception: Openings for wheel flanges shall be permit-
ted to be 21/2 inches (64 mm) maximum.
E109.2.7 Public address systems. Where public address
systems convey audible information to the public, the same
or equivalent information shall be provided in a visual for-
mat.
E109.2.8 Clocks. Where clocks are provided for use by the
general public, the clock face shall be uncluttered so that its
elements are clearly visible. Hands, numerals and digits
shall contrast with the background either light-on-dark or
dark-on-light. Where clocks are mounted overhead, numer-
als and digits shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 703.2.

SECTION E110
AIRPORTS

E110.1 New construction. New construction of airports shall
comply with Sections E110.2 through E110.4.
E110.2 TTYs. Where public pay telephones are provided, at
least one TTY shall be provided in compliance with ICC
A117.1, Section 704.4. Additionally, if four or more public pay
telephones are located in a main terminal outside the security
areas, a concourse within the security areas or a baggage claim
area in a terminal, at least one public TTY complying with ICC
A117.1, Section 704.4, shall also be provided in each such
location.
E110.3 Terminal information systems. Where terminal
information systems convey audible information to the public,
the same or equivalent information shall be provided in a visual
format.
E110.4 Clocks. Where clocks are provided for use by the gen-
eral public, the clock face shall be uncluttered so that its ele-
ments are clearly visible. Hands, numerals and digits shall
con tras t w i th the ir backg round e i the r l igh t-on -da rk o r
dark-on-light. Where clocks are mounted overhead, numerals
and digits shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 703.2.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

621

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:38 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

622

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

40_appE_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo _appE_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:10:39 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX F

RODENTPROOFING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

an apron in accordance with Section F101.6.1.1 or a floor
slab in accordance with Section F101.6.1.2.
F101.6.1.1 Apron. Where an apron is provided, the
apron shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) above, nor
less than 24 inches (610 mm) below, grade. The apron
shall not terminate below the lower edge of the siding
material. The apron shall be constructed of an approved
nondecayable, water-resistant rodentproofing material
of required strength and shall be installed around the
entire perimeter of the building. Where constructed of
masonry or concrete materials, the apron shall not be less
than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness.
F101.6.1.2 Grade floors. Where continuous concrete
grade floor slabs are provided, open spaces shall not be
left between the slab and walls, and openings in the slab
shall be protected.
F101.6.2 Sill at or above 12 inches above ground. Build-
ings not provided with a continuous foundation and which
have sills 12 or more inches (305 mm) above the ground
level shall be provide with protection against rodents at
grade in accordance with any of the following:
1. Section F101.6.1.1 or F101.6.1.2;
2. By installing solid sheet metal collars at least 0.024
inch (0.6 mm) thick at the top of each pier or pile and
around each pipe, cable, conduit, wire or other item
which provides a continuous pathway from the
ground to the floor; or
3. By encasing the pipes, cables, conduits or wires in an
enclosure constructed in accordance with Section
F101.6.1.1.

SECTION F101
GENERAL

F101.1 General. Buildings or structures and the walls enclos-
ing habitable or occupiable rooms and spaces in which persons
live, sleep or work, or in which feed, food or foodstuffs are
stored, prepared, processed, served or sold, shall be con-
structed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
F101.2 Foundation wall ventilation openings. Foundation
wall ventilator openings shall be covered for their height and
width with perforated sheet metal plates no less than 0.070 inch
(1.8 mm) thick, expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047
inch (1.2 mm) thick, cast iron grills or grating, extruded alumi-
num load-bearing vents or with hardware cloth of 0.035 inch
(0.89 mm) wire or heavier. The openings therein shall not
exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 mm).
F101.3 Foundation and exterior wall sealing. Annular
spaces around pipes, electric cables, conduits, or other open-
ings in the walls shall be protected against the passage of
rodents by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete
masonry or noncorrosive metal.
F101.4 Doors. Doors on which metal protection has been
applied shall be hinged so as to be free swinging. When closed,
the maximum clearance between any door, door jambs and sills
shall not be greater than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).
F101.5 Windows and other openings. Windows and other
openings for the purpose of light or ventilation located in exte-
rior walls within 2 feet (610 mm) above the existing ground
level immediately below such opening shall be covered for
their entire height and width, including frame, with hardware
cloth of at least 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier.
F101.5.1 Rodent-accessible openings. Windows and other
openings for the purpose of light and ventilation in the exte-
rior walls not covered in this chapter, accessible to rodents
by way of exposed pipes, wires, conduits and other appurte-
nances, shall be covered with wire cloth of at least 0.035
inch (0.89 mm) wire. In lieu of wire cloth covering, said
pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be
blocked from rodent usage by installing solid sheet metal
guards 0.024 inch (0.61 mm) thick or heavier. Guards shall
be fitted around pipes, wires, conduits or other appurte-
nances. In addition, they shall be fastened securely to and
shall extend perpendicularly from the exterior wall for a
minimum distance of 12 inches (305 mm) beyond and on
either side of pipes, wires, conduits or appurtenances.
F101.6 Pier and wood construction.
F101.6.1 Sill less than 12 inches above ground. Buildings
not provided with a continuous foundation shall be provided
with protection against rodents at grade by providing either

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

623

41_appF_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo !_appF_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:21:23 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

624

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

41_appF_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo !_appF_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:21:23 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX G

FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION G101
ADMINISTRATION

G101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to promote
the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize
public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
flood hazard areas through the establishment of comprehen-
sive regulations for management of flood hazard areas
designed to:
1. Prevent unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and
public service during times of flooding;
2. Manage the alteration of natural flood plains, stream
channels and shorelines;
3. Manage filling, grading, dredging and other develop-
ment which may increase flood damage or erosion poten-
tial;
4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will divert floodwaters or which can increase
flood hazards; and
5. Contribute to improved construction techniques in the
flood plain.
G101.2 Objectives. The objectives of this appendix are to pro-
tect human life, minimize the expenditure of public money for
flood control projects, minimize the need for rescue and relief
efforts associated with flooding, minimize prolonged business
interruption, minimize damage to public facilities and utilities,
help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas, contribute to improved
construction techniques in the flood plain and ensure that
potential owners and occupants are notified that property is
within flood hazard areas.
G101.3 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall apply to
all proposed development in a flood hazard area established in
Section 1612 of this code, including certain building work
exempt from permit under Section 105.2.
G101.4 Violations. Any violation of a provision of this appen-
dix, or failure to comply with a permit or variance issued pursu-
ant to this appendix or any requirement of this appendix, shall
be handled in accordance with Section 114.

SECTION G102
APPLICABILITY

G102.1 General. This appendix, in conjunction with the Inter-
national Building Code, provides minimum requirements for
development located in flood hazard areas, including the subdi-
vision of land; installation of utilities; placement and replace-
ment of manufactured homes; new construction and repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or additions to new construction;

substantial improvement of existing buildings and structures,
including restoration after damage, temporary structures, and
temporary or permanent storage, utility and miscellaneous
Group U buildings and structures, and certain building work
exempt from permit under Section 105.2.
G102.2 Establishment of flood hazard areas. Flood hazard
areas are established in Section 1612.3 of the International
Building Code, adopted by the applicable governing authority
on [INSERT DATE].

SECTION G103
POWERS AND DUTIES
G103.1 Permit applications. The building official shall
review all permit applications to determine whether proposed
development sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed development site is in a flood hazard area, all site
development activities (including grading, filling, utility
installation and drainage modification), all new construction
and substantial improvements (including the placement of pre-
fabricated buildings and manufactured homes) and certain
building work exempt from permit under Section 105.2 shall be
designed and constructed with methods, practices and materi-
als that minimize flood damage and that are in accordance with
this code and ASCE 24.
G103.2 Other permits. It shall be the responsibility of the
building official to assure that approval of a proposed develop-
ment shall not be given until proof that necessary permits have
been granted by federal or state agencies having jurisdiction
over such development.
G103.3 Determination of design flood elevations. If design
flood elevations are not specified, the building official is autho-
rized to require the applicant to:
1. Obtain, review and reasonably utilize data available
from a federal, state or other source, or
2. Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with
accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering tech-
niques. Such analyses shall be performed and sealed by a
registered design professional. Studies, analyses and
computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
allow review and approval by the building official. The
accuracy of data submitted for such determination shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
G103.4 Activities in riverine flood hazard areas. In riverine

flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified
but floodways have not been designated, the building official
shall not permit any new construction, substantial improve-
ment or other development, including fill, unless the applicant
demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed devel-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

625

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:05 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX G

opment, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
flood hazard area encroachment, will not increase the design
flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within
the community.
G103.5 Floodway encroachment. Prior to issuing a permit for
any floodway encroachment, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development or land-dis-
turbing activity, the building official shall require submission
of a certification, along with supporting technical data, that
demonstrates that such development will not cause any
increase of the level of the base flood.
G103.5.1 Floodway revisions. A floodway encroachment
that increases the level of the base flood is authorized if the
applicant has applied for a conditional Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) revision and has received the approval of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
G103.6 Watercourse alteration. Prior to issuing a permit for
any alteration or relocation of any watercourse, the building
official shall require the applicant to provide notification of the
proposal to the appropriate authorities of all affected adjacent
government jurisdictions, as well as appropriate state agencies.
A copy of the notification shall be maintained in the permit
records and submitted to FEMA.
G103.6.1 Engineering analysis. The building official shall
require submission of an engineering analysis which dem-
onstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased.
Such watercourses shall be maintained in a manner which
preserves the channel’s flood-carrying capacity.
G103.7 Alterations in coastal areas. Prior to issuing a permit
for any alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands in flood
hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, the building
official shall require submission of an engineering analysis
which demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not
increase the potential for flood damage.
G103.8 Records. The building official shall maintain a perma-
nent record of all permits issued in flood hazard areas, includ-
ing copies of inspection reports and certifications required in
Section 1612.

SECTION G104
PERMITS

G104.1 Required. Any person, owner or authorized agent who
intends to conduct any development in a flood hazard area shall
first make application to the building official and shall obtain
the required permit.
G104.2 Application for permit. The applicant shall file an
application in writing on a form furnished by the building offi-
cial. Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the development to be covered by
the permit.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed development is
to be conducted by legal description, street address or

similar description that will readily identify and defi-
nitely locate the site.
3. Include a site plan showing the delineation of flood haz-
ard areas, floodway boundaries, flood zones, design
flood elevations, ground elevations, proposed fill and
excavation and drainage patterns and facilities.
4. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed
development is intended.
5. Be accompanied by construction documents, grading
and filling plans and other information deemed appropri-
ate by the building official.
6. State the valuation of the proposed work.
7. Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized
agent.
G104.3 Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit under this
appendix shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval
of, any violation of this appendix or any other ordinance of the
jurisdiction. The issuance of a permit based on submitted docu-
ments and information shall not prevent the building official
from requiring the correction of errors. The building official is
authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure or site
which is in violation of this appendix or other ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
G104.4 Expiration. A permit shall become invalid if the pro-
posed development is not commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned
for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demon-
strated. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing,
one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180
days each.
G104.5 Suspension or revocation. The building official is
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this
appendix wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis
of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in viola-
tion of any ordinance or code of this jurisdiction.

SECTION G105
VARIANCES

G105.1 General. The board of appeals established pursuant to
Section 112 shall hear and decide requests for variances. The
board of appeals shall base its determination on technical justi-
fications, and has the right to attach such conditions to vari-
ances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this appendix and Section 1612.
G105.2 Records. The building official shall maintain a perma-
nent record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
G105.3 Historic structures. A variance is authorized to be
issued for the repair or rehabilitation of a historic structure
upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a his-

626

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:06 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

toric structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Exception: Within flood hazard areas, historic structures
that are not:
1. Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or
2. Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Interior as contributing to the historical signifi-
cance of a registered historic district or a district pre-
liminarily determined to qualify as an historic district;
or
3. Designated as historic under a state or local historic
preservation program that is approved by the Depart-
ment of Interior.
G105.4 Functionally dependent facilities. A variance is
authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial
improvement of a functionally dependent facility provided the
criteria in Section 1612.1 are met and the variance is the mini-
mum necessary to allow the construction or substantial
improvement, and that all due consideration has been given to
methods and materials that minimize flood damages during the
design flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
G105.5 Restrictions. The board of appeals shall not issue a
variance for any proposed development in a floodway if any
increase in flood levels would result during the base flood dis-
charge.
G105.6 Considerations. In reviewing applications for vari-
ances, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evalua-
tions, all relevant factors, all other portions of this appendix and
the following:
1. The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto
other lands resulting in further injury or damage;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or ero-
sion damage;
3. The suscep tib ility of the proposed developmen t,
including contents, to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on current and future owners;
4. The importance of the services provided by the pro-
posed development to the community;
5. The availability of alternate locations for the proposed
development that are not subject to flooding or erosion;
6. The compatibility of the proposed development with
existing and anticipated development;
7. The relationship of the proposed development to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management pro-
gram for that area;
8. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
9. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at
the site; and
10. The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions including maintenance and

APPENDIX G

repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges.
G105.7 Conditions for issuance. Variances shall only be
issued by the board of appeals upon:
1. A technical showing of good and sufficient cause that the
unique characteristics of the size, configuration or
topography of the site renders the elevation standards
inappropriate;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship by rendering the lot
undevelopable;
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;
4. A determination that the variance is the minimum neces-
sary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
5. Notification to the applicant in writing over the signature
of the building official that the issuance of a variance to
construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance cover-
age, and that such construction below the base flood
level increases risks to life and property.

SECTION G201
DEFINITIONS

G201.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein.
Refer to Chapter 2 for general definitions.
G201.2 Definitions.
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings
or other structures, temporary structures, temporary or perma-
nent storage of materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavations, operations and other land-disturbing
activities.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility
which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading or unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or ser-
vice facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure that is transportable
in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached
to the required utilities, and constructed to the Federal Mobile
Home Construction and Safety Standards and rules and regula-
tions promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development. The term also includes mobile homes,
park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures
that are placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

627

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:06 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX G

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a
single chassis, 400 square feet (37.16 m2) or less when mea-
sured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel
or seasonal use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices and
has no permanently attached additions.
VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this
section which permits construction in a manner otherwise pro-
hibited by this section where specific enforcement would result
in unnecessary hardship.
VIOLATION. A development that is not fully compliant with
this appendix or Section 1612, as applicable.

SECTION G301
SUBDIVISIONS

G301.1 General. Any subdivision proposal, including propos-
als for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, or other
proposed new development in a flood hazard area shall be
reviewed to assure that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to mini-
mize flood damage;
2. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, elec-
tric and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
3. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
G301.2 Subdivision requirements. The following require-
ments shall apply in the case of any proposed subdivision,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivi-
sions, any portion of which lies within a flood hazard area:
1. The flood hazard area, including floodways and areas
subject to high velocity wave action, as appropriate, shall
be delineated on tentative and final subdivision plats;
2. Design flood elevations shall be shown on tentative and
final subdivision plats;
3. Residential building lots shall be provided with adequate
buildable area outside the floodway; and
4. The design criteria for utilities and facilities set forth in
this appendix and appropriate International Codes shall
be met.

tice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any
increase in the level of the base flood.
G401.2 Flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action. In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action:
1. New buildings and buildings that are substantially
improved shall only be authorized landward of the reach
of mean high tide.
2. The use of fill for structural support of buildings is pro-
hibited.
G401.3 Sewer facilities. All new or replaced sanitary sewer
facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pump-
ing stations and collector systems) and on-site waste disposal
systems shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 8, ASCE
24, to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, or
impairment of the facilities and systems.
G401.4 Water facilities. All new or replacement water facili-
ties shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 8, ASCE 24, to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems.
G401.5 Storm drainage. Storm drainage shall be designed to
convey the flow of surface waters to minimize or eliminate
damage to persons or property.
G401.6 Streets and sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks shall be
designed to minimize potential for increasing or aggravating
flood levels.

SECTION G501
MANUFACTURED HOMES

G501.1 Elevation. All new and replacement manufactured
homes to be placed or substantially improved in a flood hazard
area shall be elevated such that the lowest floor of the manufac-
tured home is elevated to or above the design flood elevation.
G501.2 Foundations. All new and replacement manufactured
homes, including substantial improvement of existing manu-
factured homes, shall be placed on a permanent, reinforced
foundation that is designed in accordance with Section 1612.
G501.3 Anchoring. All new and replacement manufactured
homes to be placed or substantially improved in a flood hazard
area shall be installed using methods and practices which mini-
mize flood damage. Manufactured homes shall be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring are authorized to include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This require-
ment is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.

SECTION G401
SITE IMPROVEMENT
G401.1 Development in floodways. Development or land dis-
turbing activity shall not be authorized in the floodway unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic anal-
yses performed in accordance with standard engineering prac-

SECTION G601
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
G601.1 Placement prohibited. The placement of recreational
vehicles shall not be authorized in flood hazard areas subject to
high velocity wave action and in floodways.

628

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:06 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

G601.2 Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles in flood
hazard areas shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use,
and shall be placed on a site for less than 180 consecutive days.

G601.3 Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that are
not fully licensed and ready for highway use, or that are to be
placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days, shall meet
the requirements of Section G501 for manufactured homes.

SECTION G701
TANKS

G701.1 Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood haz-
ard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lat-
eral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.

G701.2 Above-ground tanks. Above-ground tanks in flood
hazard areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood ele-
vation or shall be anchored or otherwise designed and con-
structed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood.

G701.3 Tank inlets and vents. In flood hazard areas, tank
inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:

1. At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with cov-
ers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or out-
flow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the
design flood.
2. Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design
flood.

SECTION G801
OTHER BUILDING WORK
G801.1 Detached accessory structures. Detached accessory
structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lat-
eral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of bouyancy, during conditions of the design flood.
Fully enclosed accessory structures shall have flood openings
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.

G801.2 Fences. Fences in floodways that may block the pas-
sage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh
fences, shall meet the requirement of Section G103.5.

G801.3 Oil derricks. Oil derricks located in flood hazard
areas shall be designed in conformance with the flood loads in
Sections 1603.1.7 and 1612.

G801.4 Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways. Retain-
ing walls, sidewalks and driveways shall meet the requirements
of Section 1803.4.

G801.5 Prefabricated swimming pools. Prefabricated swim-
ming pools in floodways shall meet the requirements of Section
G103.5.

APPENDIX G

SECTION G901
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND TEMPORARY
STORAGE
G901.1 Temporary structures. Temporary structures shall be
erected for a period of less than 180 days. Temporary structures
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral move-
ment resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood . Fully
enclosed temporary structures shall have flood openings to
allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
G901.2 Temporary storage. Temporary storage includes stor-
age of goods and materials for a period of less than 180 days.
Stored materials shall not include hazardous materials.
G901.3 Floodway encroachment. Temporary structures and
temporary storage in floodways shall meet the requirements of
G103.5.

SECTION G1001
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U
G1001.1 Utility and miscellaneous Group U. Utility and mis-
cellaneous Group U includes buildings that are accessory in
character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any
specific occupancy in the International Building Code, includ-
ing, but not limited to, agricultural buildings, aircraft hangars
(accessory to a one- or two-family residence), barns, carports,
fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) high, grain silos (accessory
to a residential occupancy), greenhouses, livestock shelters,
private garages, retaining walls, sheds, stables and towers.
G1001.2 Flood loads. Utility and miscellaneous Group U
buildings and structures, including substantial improvement of
such buildings and structures, shall be anchored to prevent flo-
tation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from flood loads,
including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the
design flood.
G1001.3 Elevation. Utility and miscellaneous Group U build-
ings and structures, including substantial improvement of such
buildings and structures, shall be elevated such that the lowest
floor, including basement, is elevated to or above the design
flood elevation in accordance with Section 1612 of the Interna-
tional Building Code.

G1001.4 Enclosures below design flood elevation. Fully
enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be at or
above grade on all sides and conform to the following:
1. In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave
action, enclosed areas shall have flood openings to allow
for the automatic inflow and outflow of floodwaters.
2. In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave
action, enclosed areas shall have walls below the design
flood elevation that are designed to break away or col-
lapse from a water load less than that which would occur
during the design flood, without causing collapse, dis-
placement or other structural damage to the building or
structure.
G1001.5 Flood-damage-resistant materials. Flood-dam-
age-resistant materials shall be used below the design flood ele-
vation.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

629

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:07 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX G

G1001.6 Protection of mechanical, plumbing and electrical
systems. Mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, includ-
ing plumbing fixtures, shall be elevated to or above the design
flood elevation.
Exception: Electrical systems, equipment and components,
and heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing
appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems and other ser-
vice equipment shall be permitted to be located below the
design flood elevation provided that they are designed and
installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydro-
dynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoy-
ancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood
elevation in compliance with the flood-resistant construc-
tion requirements of this code. Electrical wiring systems
shall be permitted to be located below the design flood ele-
vation provided they conform to the provisions of NFPA 70.

SECTION G1101
REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASCE 24–05

Flood Resistance Design
and Construction

HUD 24 CFR Manufactured Home
Part 3280
Construction and Safety
(1994)
Standards

G103.1,
G401.3,
G401.4

G201

IBC—06

International Building Code

G102.2

NFPA 70—08 National Electrical Code

G1001.6

630

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

42_appG_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo "_appG_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:23:07 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX H

SIGNS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION H101
GENERAL

H101.1 General. A sign shall not be erected in a manner that
would confuse or obstruct the view of or interfere with exit
signs required by Chapter 10 or with official traffic signs, sig-
nals or devices. Signs and sign support structures, together with
their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair
and in proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of
signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
H101.2 Signs exempt from permits. The following signs are
exempt from the requirements to obtain a permit before erec-
tion:
1. Painted nonilluminated signs.
2. Temporary signs announcing the sale or rent of property.
3. Signs erected by transportation authorities.
4. Projecting signs not exceeding 2.5 square feet (0.23 m2).
5. The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that
is designed for such changes, or the repainting or reposi-
tioning of display matter shall not be deemed an alter-
ation.

SECTION H102
DEFINITIONS

H102.1 General. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the fol-
lowing words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appen-
dix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of the
International Building Code for general definitions.
COMBINATION SIGN. A sign incorporating any combina-
tion of the features of pole, projecting and roof signs.
DISPLAY SIGN. The area made available by the sign struc-
ture for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
ELECTRIC SIGN. A sign containing electrical wiring, but
not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.
GROUND SIGN. A billboard or similar type of sign which is
supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon
the ground other than a combination sign or pole sign, as
defined by this code.
POLE SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in
the ground.
PORTABLE DISPLAY SURFACE. A display surface tem-
porarily fixed to a standardized advertising structure which is
regularly moved from structure to structure at periodic inter-
vals.

PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign, which
projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or struc-
ture.

ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet
of a building or structure.

SIGN. Any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, mar-
quee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line,
trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall
be constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or
manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall
be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, per-
son, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or
merchandise, whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner
outdoors. Every sign shall be classified and conform to the
requirements of that classification as set forth in this chapter.

SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports or is
capable of supporting a sign as defined in this code. A sign
structure is permitted to be a single pole and is not required to
be an integral part of the building.

WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against the wall
of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a
plane parallel to the plane of said wall.

SECTION H103
LOCATION

H103.1 Location restrictions. Signs shall not be erected, con-
structed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any
window or door or opening used as a means of egress or so as to
prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part
thereof. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or man-
ner to a fire escape, nor be placed in such manner as to interfere
with any opening required for ventilation.

SECTION H104
IDENTIFICATION

H104.1 Identification. Every outdoor advertising display sign
hereafter erected, constructed or maintained, for which a per-
mit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the per-
son, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign and
shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued
for said sign or other method of identification approved by the
building official.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

631

43_appH_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo #_appH_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:02 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX H

SECTION H105
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
H105.1 General requirements. Signs shall be designed and
constructed to comply with the provisions of this code for use
of materials, loads and stresses.
H105.2 Permits, drawings and specifications. Where a per-
mit is required, as provided in Chapter 1, construction docu-
ments shall be required. These documents shall show the
dimensions, material and required details of construction,
including loads, stresses and anchors.
H105.3 Wind load. Signs shall be designed and constructed to
withstand wind pressure as provided for in Chapter 16.
H105.4 Seismic load. Signs designed to withstand wind pres-
sures shall be considered capable of withstanding earthquake
loads, except as provided for in Chapter 16.
H105.5 Working stresses. In outdoor advertising display
signs, the allowable working stresses shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 16. The working stresses of wire rope
and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate
strength of the rope or fasteners.
Exceptions:
1. The allowable working stresses for steel and wood
shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapters
22 and 23.
2. The working strength of chains, cables, guys or steel
rods shall not exceed one-fifth of the ultimate strength
of such chains, cables, guys or steel.
H105.6 Attachment. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or
steel shall be safely and securely fastened by means of metal
anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size
and anchorage to safely support the loads applied.

SECTION H106
ELECTRICAL

H106.1 Illumination. A sign shall not be illuminated by other
than electrical means, and electrical devices and wiring shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70. Any
open spark or flame shall not be used for display purposes
unless specifically approved.
H106.1.1 Internally illuminated signs. Except as provided
for in Sections 402.16 and 2611, where internally illumi-
nated signs have facings of wood or approved plastic, the
area of such facing section shall not be more than 120 square
feet (11.16 m2) and the wiring for electric lighting shall be
entirely enclosed in the sign cabinet with a clearance of not
less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the facing material. The
dimensional limitation of 120 square feet (11.16 m2) shall
not apply to sign facing sections made from flame-resis-
tant-coated fabric (ordinarily known as “flexible sign face
plastic”) that weighs less than 20 ounces per square yard
(678 g/m2) and that, when tested in accordance with NFPA
701, meets the fire propagation performance requirements
of both Test 1 and Test 2 or that when tested in accordance
with an approved test method, exhibits an average burn time

of 2 seconds or less and a burning extent of 5.9 inches (150
mm) or less for 10 specimens.
H106.2 Electrical service. Signs that require electrical service
shall comply with NFPA 70.

SECTION H107
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS

H107.1 Use of combustibles. Wood, approved plastic or plas-
tic veneer panels as provided for in Chapter 26, or other materi-
als of combustible characteristics similar to wood, used for
moldings, cappings, nailing blocks, letters and latticing, shall
comply with Section H109.1, and shall not be used for other
ornamental features of signs, unless approved.
H107.1.1 Plastic materials. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this code, plastic materials which burn at a rate
no faster than 2.5 inches per minute (64 mm/s) when tested
in accordance with ASTM D 635 shall be deemed approved
plastics and can be used as the display surface material and
for the letters, decorations and facings on signs and outdoor
display structures.
H107.1.2 Electric sign faces. Individual plastic facings of
electric signs shall not exceed 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in
area.
H107.1.3 Area limitation. If the area of a display surface
exceeds 200 square feet (18.6 m2), the area occupied or cov-
ered by approved plastics shall be limited to 200 square feet
(18.6 m2) plus 50 percent of the difference between 200
square feet (18.6 m2) and the area of display surface. The
area of plastic on a display surface shall not in any case
exceed 1,100 square feet (102 m2).
H107.1.4 Plastic appurtenances. Letters and decorations
mounted on an approved plastic facing or display surface
can be made of approved plastics.

SECTION H108
ANIMATED DEVICES

H108.1 Fail-safe device. Signs that contain moving sections or
ornaments shall have fail-safe provisions to prevent the section
or ornament from releasing and falling or shifting its center of
gravity more than 15 inches (381 mm). The fail-safe device
shall be in addition to the mechanism and the mechanism’s
housing which operate the movable section or ornament. The
fail-safe device shall be capable of supporting the full dead
weight of the section or ornament when the moving mechanism
releases.

SECTION H109
GROUND SIGNS

H109.1 Height restrictions. The structural frame of ground
signs shall not be erected of combustible materials to a height
of more than 35 feet (10668 mm) above the ground. Ground
signs constructed entirely of noncombustible material shall not
be erected to a height of greater than 100 feet (30 480 mm)
above the ground. Greater heights are permitted where

632

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

43_appH_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo #_appH_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:03 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

approved and located so as not to create a hazard or danger to
the public.
H109.2 Required clearance. The bottom coping of every
ground sign shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the
ground or street level, which space can be filled with platform
decorative trim or light wooden construction.
H109.3 Wood anchors and supports. Where wood anchors or
supports are embedded in the soil, the wood shall be pressure
treated with an approved preservative.

SECTION H110
ROOF SIGNS

H110.1 General. Roof signs shall be constructed entirely of
metal or other approved noncombustible material except as
provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1. Provisions
shall be made for electric grounding of metallic parts. Where
combustible materials are permitted in letters or other orna-
mental features, wiring and tubing shall be kept free and insu-
lated therefrom. Roof signs shall be so constructed as to leave a
clear space of not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) between the roof
level and the lowest part of the sign and shall have at least 5 feet
(1524 mm) clearance between the vertical supports thereof. No
portion of any roof sign structure shall project beyond an exte-
rior wall.
Exception: Signs on flat roofs with every part of the roof
accessible.
H110.2 Bearing plates. The bearing plates of roof signs shall
distribute the load directly to or upon masonry walls, steel roof
girders, columns or beams. The building shall be designed to
avoid overstress of these members.
H110.3 Height of solid signs. A roof sign having a solid sur-
face shall not exceed, at any point, a height of 24 feet (7315
mm) measured from the roof surface.
H110.4 Height of open signs. Open roof signs in which the
uniform open area is not less than 40 percent of total gross area
shall not exceed a height of 75 feet (22 860 mm) on buildings of
Type 1 or Type 2 construction. On buildings of other construc-
tion types, the height shall not exceed 40 feet (12 192 mm).
Such signs shall be thoroughly secured to the building upon
which they are installed, erected or constructed by iron, metal
anchors, bolts, supports, chains, stranded cables, steel rods or
braces and they shall be maintained in good condition.
H110.5 Height of closed signs. A closed roof sign shall not be
erected to a height greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above the
roof of buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction, nor more
than 35 feet (10 668 mm) above the roof of buildings of Type 3,
4 or 5 construction.

SECTION H111
WALL SIGNS

H111.1 Materials. Wall signs which have an area exceeding
40 square feet (3.72 m2) shall be constructed of metal or other
approved noncombustible material, except for nailing rails and
as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

APPENDIX H

H111.2 Exterior wall mounting details. Wall signs attached
to exterior walls of solid masonry, concrete or stone shall be
safely and securely attached by means of metal anchors, bolts
or expansion screws of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) diameter
and shall be embedded at least 5 inches (127 mm). Wood
blocks shall not be used for anchorage, except in the case of
wall signs attached to buildings with walls of wood. A wall sign
shall not be supported by anchorages secured to an unbraced
parapet wall.

H111.3 Extension. Wall signs shall not extend above the top of
the wall, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which the signs are
attached unless such signs conform to the requirements for roof
signs, projecting signs or ground signs.

SECTION H112
PROJECTING SIGNS

H112.1 General. Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely
of metal or other noncombustible material and securely
attached to a building or structure by metal supports such as
bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. Staples or
nails shall not be used to secure any projecting sign to any
building or structure. The dead load of projecting signs not par-
allel to the building or structure and the load due to wind pres-
sure shall be supported with chains, guys or steel rods having
net cross-sectional dimension of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm)
diameter. Such supports shall be erected or maintained at an
angle of at least 45 percent (0.78 rad) with the horizontal to
resist the dead load and at angle of 45 percent (0.78 rad) or
more with the face of the sign to resist the specified wind pres-
sure. If such projecting sign exceeds 30 square feet (2.8 m2) in
one facial area, there shall be provided at least two such sup-
ports on each side not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) apart to
resist the wind pressure.

H112.2 Attachment of supports. Supports shall be secured to
a bolt or expansion screw that will develop the strength of the
supporting chains, guys or steel rods, with a minimum 5/8-inch
(15.9 mm) bolt or lag screw, by an expansion shield. Turn buck-
les shall be placed in chains, guys or steel rods supporting pro-
jecting signs.

H112.3 Wall mounting details. Chains, cables, guys or steel
rods used to support the live or dead load of projecting signs are
permitted to be fastened to solid masonry walls with expansion
bolts or by machine screws in iron supports, but such supports
shall not be attached to an unbraced parapet wall. Where the
supports must be fastened to walls made of wood, the support-
ing anchor bolts must go through the wall and be plated or fas-
tened on the inside in a secure manner.

H112.4 Height limitation. A projecting sign shall not be
erected on the wall of any building so as to project above the
roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where there is no
cornice wall; except that a sign erected at a right angle to the
building, the horizontal width of which sign is perpendicular to
such a wall and does not exceed 18 inches (457 mm), is permit-
ted to be erected to a height not exceeding 2 feet (610 mm)
above the roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where
there is no cornice wall. A sign attached to a corner of a build-

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

633

43_appH_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo #_appH_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:04 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX H

ing and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be
deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall.

H112.5 Additional loads. Projecting sign structures which
will be used to support an individual on a ladder or other ser-
vicing device, whether or not specifically designed for the
servicing device, shall be capable of supporting the antici-
pated additional load, but not less than a 100-pound (445 N)
concentrated horizontal load and a 300-pound (1334 N) con-
centrated vertical load applied at the point of assumed or
most eccentric loading. The building component to which
the projecting sign is attached shall also be designed to sup-
port the additional loads.

TABLE 4-B
THICKNESS OF PROJECTION SIGN

PROJECTION
(feet)

MAXIMUM THICKNESS
(feet)

5
4
3
2
1

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

2
2.5
3
3.5
4

SECTION H115
REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASTM D 635—03 Test Method for
Rate of Burning and/or
Extent and Time of
Burning of Self-Supporting
Plastics in a Horizontal Position

H107.1.1

NFPA 70—08

National Electrical Code H106.1, H106.2

NFPA 701—99

Methods of Fire Test for
Flame Propagation of Textiles
and Films

H106.1.1

SECTION H113
MARQUEE SIGNS

H113.1 Materials. Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely
of metal or other approved noncombustible material except as
provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

H113.2 Attachment. Marquee signs shall be attached to
approved marquees that are constructed in accordance with
Section 3106.

H113.3 Dimensions. Marquee signs, whether on the front or
side, shall not project beyond the perimeter of the marquee.

H113.4 Height limitation. Marquee signs shall not extend
more than 6 feet (1829 mm) above, nor 1 foot (305 mm) below
such marquee, but under no circumstances shall the sign or
signs have a vertical dimension greater than 8 feet (2438 mm).

SECTION H114
PORTABLE SIGNS

H114.1 General. Portable signs shall conform to requirements
for ground, roof, projecting, flat and temporary signs where
such signs are used in a similar capacity. The requirements of
this section shall not be construed to require portable signs to
have connections to surfaces, tie-downs or foundations where
provisions are made by temporary means or configuration of
the structure to provide stability for the expected duration of
the installation.

TABLE 4-A
SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS IN SIGNS

MAXIMUM SIZE OF
EXPOSED PANEL

Any dimension
(inches)

Area
(square inches)

MINIMUM
THICKNESS
OF GLASS
(inches)

30

45

144

> 144

500

700

3,600

> 3,600

1/8
3/16
1/4
1/4

TYPE OF GLASS

Plain, plate or wired

Plain, plate or wired

Plain, plate or wired

Wired glass

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

634

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

43_appH_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo #_appH_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:04 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX I

PATIO COVERS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION I101
GENERAL

(89 mm) thick and further provided that the columns do not
support loads in excess of 750 pounds (3.36 kN) per column.

I101.1 General. Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached
from or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used
only for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as car-
ports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms. Openings
shall be permitted to be enclosed with insect screening,
approved translucent or transparent plastic not more that 0.125
inch (3.2 mm) in thickness, glass conforming to the provisions
of Chapter 24 or any combination of the foregoing.

SECTION I102
DEFINITIONS

I102.1 General. The following word and term shall, for the
purposes of this appendix, have the meaning shown herein.
PATIO COVERS. One story structures not exceeding 12 feet
(3657 mm) in height. Enclosure walls shall be permitted to be
of any configuration, provided the open or glazed area of the
longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 per-
cent of the area below a minimum of 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm)
of each wall, measured from the floor.

SECTION I103
EXTERIOR OPENINGS
I103.1 Light, ventilation and emergency egress. Exterior
openings required for light and ventilation shall be permitted to
open into a patio structure. However, the patio structure shall be
unenclosed if such openings are serving as emergency egress
or rescue openings from sleeping rooms. Where such exterior
openings serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio
structure, unless unenclosed, shall be provided with exits con-
forming to the provision of Chapter 10.

SECTION I104
STRUCTURAL PROVISIONS

I104.1 Design loads. Patio covers shall be designed and con-
structed to sustain, within the stress limits of this code, all dead
loads plus a minimum vertical live load of 10 pounds per square
foot (0.48 kN/m2) except that snow loads shall be used where
such snow loads exceed this minimum. Such patio covers shall
be designed to resist the minimum wind and seismic loads set
forth in this code.
I104.2 Footings. In areas with a frost depth of zero, a patio
cover shall be permitted to be supported on a concrete slab on
grade without footings, provided the slab conforms to the pro-
visions of Chapter 19 of this code, is not less than 31/2 inches

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

44_appI_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo $_appI_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:44 PM

1

635

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

636

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

44_appI_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo $_appI_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:31:44 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX J

GRADING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION J101
GENERAL

TERRACE. A relatively level step constructed in the face of a
graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes.

J101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading,
excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and
embankments. Where conflicts occur between the technical
requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the
geotechnical report shall govern.
J101.2 Flood hazard areas. The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction,
including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood haz-
ard areas established in Section 1612.3 or in flood hazard areas
where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have
not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed work will
not result in any increase in the level of the base flood.

SECTION J102
DEFINITIONS

J102.1 Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix chapter,
the terms, phrases and words listed in this section and their
derivatives shall have the indicated meanings.
BENCH. A relatively level step excavated into earth material
on which fill is to be placed.
COMPACTION. The densification of a fill by mechanical
means.
CUT. See Excavation.
DOWN DRAIN. A device for collecting water from a swale or
ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an
approved drainage facility
EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result
of the movement of wind, water or ice.
EXCAVATION. The removal of earth material by artificial
means, also referred to as a cut.
FILL. Deposition of earth materials by artificial means.
GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface.
GRADE, EXISTING. The grade prior to grading.
GRADE, FINISHED. The grade of the site at the conclusion
of all grading efforts.
GRADING. An excavation or fill or combination thereof.
KEY. A compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth
material beneath the toe of a slope.
SLOPE. An inclined surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

SECTION J103
PERMITS REQUIRED

J103.1 Permits required. Except as exempted in Section
J103.2, no grading shall be performed without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the building official. A grading
permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or
other structures.
J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for
the following:
1. Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided
there is no danger to the public, and that such grading
will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
2. Excavation for construction of a structure permitted
under this code.
3. Cemetery graves.
4. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5. Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.
6. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpil-
ing rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by
other regulations, provided such operations do not affect
the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses
in, soil on adjoining properties.
7. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction
of a registered design professional.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix
shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or
any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

SECTION J104
PERMIT APPLICATION AND SUBMITTALS
J104.1 Submittal requirements. In addition to the provisions
of Section 105.3, the applicant shall state the estimated quanti-
ties of excavation and fill.
J104.2 Site plan requirements. In addition to the provisions of
Section 107, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and fin-
ished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate
the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it com-
plies with the requirements of this code. The plans shall show the
existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to iden-
tify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this
code.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

637

45_appJ_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo %_appJ_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 12:32:22 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX J

J104.3 Geotechnical report. A geotechnical report prepared
by a registered design professional shall be provided. The
report shall contain at least the following:
1. The nature and distribution of existing soils;
2. Conclusions and recommendations for grading proce-
dures;
3. Soil design criteria for any structures or embankments
required to accomplish the proposed grading; and
4. Where necessary, slope stability studies, and recommen-
dations and conclusions regarding site geology.
Exception: A geotechnical report is not required where the
building code official determines that the nature of the work
applied for is such that a report is not necessary.
J104.4 Liquefaction study. For sites with mapped maximum
considered earthquake spectral response accelerations at short
periods (Ss) greater than 0.5g as determined by Section 1613, a
study of the liquefaction potential of the site shall be provided,
and the recommendations incorporated in the plans.
Exception: A liquefaction study is not required where the
building official determines from established local data that
the liquefaction potential is low.

SECTION J105
INSPECTIONS

J105.1 General. Inspections shall be governed by Section 109
of this code.
J105.2 Special inspections. The special inspection require-
ments of Section 1704.7 shall apply to work performed under a
grading permit where required by the building official.

SECTION J106
EXCAVATIONS

J106.1 Maximum slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no
steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be no steeper
than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50-percent slope)
unless the owner or authorized agent furnishes a geotechnical
report justifying a steeper slope.
Exceptions:
1. A cut surface shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1.5
units horizontal to one unit vertical (67-percent slope)
provided that all of the following are met:
1.1. It is not intended to support structures or sur-
charges.
1.2. It is adequately protected against erosion.
1.3. It is no more than 8 feet (2438 mm) in height.
1.4. It is approved by the building code official.
1.5. Ground water is not encountered.
2. A cut surface in bedrock shall be permitted to be at a
slope of one unit horizontal to one unit vertical
(100-percent slope).

SECTION J107
FILLS

J107.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the
geotechnical report, fills shall comply with the provisions of
this section.

J107.2 Surface preparation. The ground surface shall be pre-
pared to receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil and other
unsuitable materials, and scarifying the ground to provide a
bond with the fill material.

J107.3 Benching. Where existing grade is at a slope steeper than
five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20-percent slope) and
the depth of the fill exceeds 5 feet (1524 mm) benching shall be
provided in accordance with Figure J107.3. A key shall be pro-
vided which is at least 10 feet (3048 mm) in width and 2 feet (610
mm) in depth.

J107.4 Fill material. Fill material shall not include organic,
frozen or other deleterious materials. No rock or similar irre-
ducible material greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in any dimen-
sion shall be included in fills.

J107.5 Compaction. All fill material shall be compacted to 90
percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D 1557,
Modified Proctor, in lifts not exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in
depth.

J107.6 Maximum slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no
steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes steeper than
two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50-percent slope) shall
be justified by a geotechnical report or engineering data.

SECTION J108
SETBACKS

J108.1 General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the
property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimen-
sions shall be measured perpendicular to the property line and
shall be as shown in Figure J108.1, unless substantiating data is
submitted justifying reduced setbacks.

J108.2 Top of slope. The setback at the top of a cut slope shall
not be less than that shown in Figure J108.1, or than is required
to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is
greater.

J108.3 Slope protection. Where required to protect adjacent
properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grad-
ing, additional protection, approved by the building official,
shall be included. Such protection may include but shall not be
limited to:

1. Setbacks greater than those required by Figure J108.1.
2. Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction.
3. Erosion protection of the fill slopes.
4. Provision for the control of surface waters.

638

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

45_appJ_ibc_2009pg638-640.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo %_appJ_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:23:44 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX J

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE J107.3
BENCHING DETAILS

Property

Line

H/5 but 2 ft. (610 mm) minimum

and need not exceed

10 ft. (3048 mm) maximum

Top of

Slope

Property

Line

H/5 but 2 ft. (610 mm) minimum

and need not exceed

20 ft. (6096 mm) maximum

Top of

Slope

Cut or Fill

Slope

Natural or

Finish Grade

h

Interceptor Drain

(if required)

Natural or

Finish Grade

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE J108.1
DRAINAGE DIMENSIONS

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

639

45_appJ_ibc_2009pg638-640.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo %_appJ_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:23:45 PM

3

J110.2 Other devices. Where necessary, check dams, crib-
bing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to
control erosion and provide safety.

ASTM D
1557-e01

SECTION J111
REFERENCED STANDARDS

Test Method for Laboratory
Compaction Characteristics
of Soil Using Modified Effort
[56,000 ft-lb/ft3 (2,700kN-m/m3)].

J107.6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX J

SECTION J109
DRAINAGE AND TERRACING

J109.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended by a regis-
tered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
Exception: Drainage facilities and terracing need not be
provided where the ground slope is not steeper than 3 hori-
zontal to 1 vertical (33 percent).
J109.2 Terraces. Terraces at least 6 feet (1829 mm) in width
shall be established at not more than 30-foot (9144 mm) verti-
cal intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage
and debris. Suitable access shall be provided to allow for clean-
ing and maintenance.
Where more than two terraces are required, one terrace,
located at approximately mid-height, shall be at least 12 feet
(3658 mm) in width.
Swales or ditches shall be provided on terraces. They shall
have a minimum gradient of 20 horizontal to 1 vertical (5 per-
cent) and shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76
mm) in thickness, or with other materials suitable to the appli-
cation. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches (305
mm) and a minimum width of 5 feet (1524 mm).
A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a
tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (1256 m2) (pro-
jected) without discharging into a down drain.
J109 .3 Interceptor dra ins . In tercep tor dra ins sha l l be
installed along the top of cut slopes receiving drainage from a
tributary width greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm), measured
horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of 1 foot (305
mm) and a minimum width of 3 feet (915 mm). The slope shall
be approved by the building official, but shall not be less than
50 horizontal to 1 vertical (2 percent). The drain shall be paved
with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness, or by
other materials suitable to the application. Discharge from the
drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and
shall be approved by the building official.
J109.4 Drainage across property lines. Drainage across
property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grad-
ing. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site
or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the
ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installa-
tion of nonerosive down drains or other devices.

SECTION J110
EROSION CONTROL

J110.1 General. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be pre-
pared and maintained to control erosion. This control shall be
permitted to consist of effective planting.
Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided
on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resis-
tant character of the materials.
Erosion control for the slopes shall be installed as soon as
practicable and prior to calling for final inspection.

640

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

45_appJ_ibc_2009pg638-640.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo %_appJ_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, March 05, 2009 12:23:46 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX K

ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

With the exception of Section K111, this appendix contains
only administrative provisions that are intended to be used by a
jurisdiction to implement and enforce NFPA 70, the National
Electrical Code. Annex H of NFPA 70 also contains adminis-
trative and enforcement provisions, and these provisions may
or may not be completely compatible with or consistent with
Chapter 1 of the IBC, whereas the provisions in IBC Appendix
K are compatible and consistent with Chapter 1 of the IBC and
other ICC codes. Section K111 contains technical provisions
that are unique to this appendix and are in addition to those of
NFPA 70.
The provisions of Appendix K are specific to what might be
designated as an Electrical Department of Inspection and
Code Enforcement and could be implemented where other such
provisions are not adopted.

SECTION K101
GENERAL

K101.1 Purpose. A purpose of this code is to establish mini-
mum requirements to safeguard public health, safety and gen-
e ra l we l fa re by regu la t ing and con tro l l ing the des ign ,
construction, installation, quality of materials, location, opera-
tion and maintenance or use of electrical systems and equip-
ment.
K101.2 Scope. This code applies to the design, construction,
installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addi-
tion to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equip-
ment.

SECTION K102
APPLICABILITY

K102.1 General. The provisions of this code apply to all mat-
ters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth
in Section K101.
K102.2 Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided
for in this chapter, a provision in this code shall not require the
removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the contin-
ued utilization and maintenance of, existing electrical systems
and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption
of this code.
K102.3 Maintenance. Electrical systems, equipment, materi-
als and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof
shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accor-
dance with the original design and in a safe, hazard-free condi-
tion. Devices or safeguards that are required by this code shall
be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which
installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the electrical systems and
equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the

building official shall have the authority to require that the elec-
trical systems and equipment be reinspected.
K102.4 Additions, alterations and repairs. Additions, alter-
ations, renovations and repairs to electrical systems and equip-
ment shall conform to that required for new electrical systems
and equipment without requiring that the existing electrical
systems or equipment comply with all of the requirements of
this code. Additions, alterations and repairs shall not cause
existing electrical systems or equipment to become unsafe,
hazardous or overloaded.
Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to
existing electrical systems and equipment shall meet the provi-
sions for new construction, except where such work is per-
formed in the same manner and arrangement as was in the
existing system, is not hazardous and is approved.
K102.5 Subjects not regulated by this code. Where no appli-
cable standards or requirements are set forth in this code, or are
contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or
bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction, compliance with applicable
standards of nationally recognized standards as are approved
shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the
intent of this code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the
authority of the building official to determine compliance with
codes or standards for those activities or installations within the
building official’s jurisdiction or responsibility.

SECTION K103
PERMITS

K103.1 Types of permits. An owner, authorized agent or con-
tractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or
to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or
replace electrical systems or equipment, the installation of
which is regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be
done, shall first make application to the building official and
obtain the required permit for the work.
Exception: Where repair or replacement of electrical sys-
tems or equipment must be performed in an emergency situ-
ation, the permit application shall be submitted within the
next working business day of the department of electrical
inspection.
K103.2 Work exempt from permit. The following work shall
be exempt from the requirement for a permit:
1. Listed cord- and plug-connected temporary decora-
tive lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not
the outlets therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of
the required capacity in the same location.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

641

46_appK_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo &_appK_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:25:59 AM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

APPENDIX K

4. Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suit-
able experimental laboratories.
5. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or
equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not
capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in vio-
lation of the provisions of this code or other laws or ordinances
of this jurisdiction.

SECTION K104
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
K104.1 Information on construction documents. Construc-
tion documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material.
Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted
where approved by the building official. Construction docu-
ments shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location,
nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that
such work will conform to the provisions of this code and rele-
vant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by
the building official.
K104.2 Penetrations. Construction documents shall indicate
where penetrations will be made for electrical systems and
shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining
required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblock-
ing.
K104.3 Load calculations. Where an addition or alteration is
made to an existing electrical system, an electrical load calcula-
tion shall be prepared to determine if the existing electrical ser-
vice has the capacity to serve the added load.

SECTION K105
ALTERNATIVE ENGINEERED DESIGN

K105.1 General. The design, documentation, inspection, test-
ing and approval of an alternative engineered design electrical
system shall comply with this section.
K105.2 Design criteria. An alternative engineered design
shall conform to the intent of the provisions of this code and
shall provide an equivalent level of quality, strength, effective-
ness, fire-resistance, durability and safety. Materials, equip-
ment or components shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
K105.3 Submittal. The registered design professional shall
indicate on the permit application that the electrical system is
an alternative engineered design. The permit and permanent
permit records shall indicate that an alternative engineered
design was part of the approved installation.
K105.4 Technical data. The registered design professional
shall submit sufficient technical data to substantiate the pro-
posed alternative engineered design and to prove that the per-
formance meets the intent of this code.
K105.5 Construction documents. The registered design pro-
fessional shall submit to the building official two complete sets
of signed and sealed construction documents for the alternative

engineered design. The construction documents shall include
floor plans and a diagram of the work.
K105.6 Design approval. Where the building official deter-
mines that the alternative engineered design conforms to the
intent of this code, the electrical system shall be approved. If
the alternative engineered design is not approved, the building
official shall notify the registered design professional in writ-
ing, stating the reasons therefor.
K105.7 Inspection and testing. The alternative engineered
design shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the
requirements of this code.

SECTION K106
REQUIRED INSPECTIONS

K106.1 General. The building official, upon notification, shall
make the inspections set forth in this section.
K106.2 Underground. Underground inspection shall be made
after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping and
conductors installed, and before backfill is put in place. Where
excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks
and other rubble that would damage or break the raceway, cable
or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection
shall be provided in the form of granular or selected material,
approved running boards, sleeves or other means.
K106.3 Rough-in. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the
roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wir-
ing and other components to be concealed are complete, and
prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
K106.4 Contractors’ responsibilities. It shall be the responsi-
bility of every contractor who enters into contracts for the
installation or repair of electrical systems for which a permit is
required to comply with adopted state and local rules and regu-
lations concerning licensing.

SECTION K107
PREFABRICATED CONSTRUCTION
K107.1 Prefabricated construction. Prefabricated construc-
tion is subject to Sections K107.2 through K107.5.
K107.2 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services. Prior
to the approval of a prefabricated construction assembly hav-
ing concealed electrical work and the issuance of an electrical
permit, the building official shall require the submittal of an
evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly,
indicating the complete details of the electrical system, includ-
ing a description of the system and its components, the basis
upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and simi-
lar information, and other data as necessary for the building
official to determine conformance to this code.
K107.3 Evaluation service. The building official shall desig-
nate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evalu-
ation agency, and review such agency’s evaluation report for
adequacy and conformance to this code.
K107.4 Follow-up inspection. Except where ready access is
provided to electrical systems, service equipment and accesso-
ries for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or

642

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

46_appK_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo &_appK_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:25:59 AM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

dismantling, the building official shall conduct the in-plant
inspections as frequently as necessary to ensure conformance
to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an inde-
pendent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspec-
tions. The inspection agency shall furnish the building official
with the follow-up inspection manual and a report of inspec-
tions upon request, and the electrical system shall have an iden-
tifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that
factory inspections have been performed.
K107.5 Test and inspection records. Required test and
inspection records shall be available to the building official at
all times during the fabrication of the electrical system and the
erection of the building; or such records as the building official
designates shall be filed.

SECTION K108
TESTING

K108.1 Testing. Electrical work shall be tested as required in
this code. Tests shall be performed by the permit holder and
observed by the building official.

K108.1.1 Apparatus, material and labor for tests. Appa-
ratus, material and labor required for testing an electrical
system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit
holder.
K108.1.2 Reinspection and testing. Where any work or
installation does not pass an initial test or inspection, the
necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compli-
ance with this code. The work or installation shall then be
resubmitted to the building official for inspection and test-
ing.

SECTION K109
RECONNECTION
K109.1 Connection after order to disconnect. A person shall
not make utility service or energy source connections to sys-
tems regulated by this code, which have been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the building official, or the use of
which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building offi-
cial until the building official authorizes the reconnection and
use of such systems.

SECTION K110
CONDEMNING ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
K110.1 Authority to condemn electrical systems. Wherever
the building official determines that any electrical system, or
portion thereof, regulated by this code has become hazardous
to life, health or property, the building official shall order in
writing that such electrical systems either be removed or
restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with
such order shall be specified in the written notice. A person
shall not use or maintain a defective electrical system or equip-
ment after receiving such notice.
Where such electrical system is to be disconnected, written
notice as prescribed in this code shall be given. In cases of

APPENDIX K

immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall
be made immediately without such notice.

SECTION K111
ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS

K111.1 Adoption. Electrical systems and equipment shall be
designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the
International Residential Code or NFPA 70 as applicable,
except as otherwise provided in this code.
[F] K111.2 Abatement of electrical hazards. All identified
electrical hazards shall be abated. All identified hazardous
electrical conditions in permanent wiring shall be brought to
the attention of the building official responsible for enforce-
ment of this code. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances and
other equipment which is modified or damaged and constitutes
an electrical shock or fire hazard shall not be used.
[F] K111.3 Appliance and fixture listing. Electrical appli-
ances and fixtures shall be tested and listed in published reports
of inspected electrical equipment by an approved agency and
installed in accordance with all instructions included as part of
such listing.
K111.4 Nonmetallic-sheathed cable. The use of Type NM,
NMC and NMS (nonmetallic sheathed) cable wiring methods
shall not be limited based on height, number of stories or con-
struction type of the building or structure.
K111.5 Cutting, notching and boring. The cutting, notching
and boring of wood and steel framing members, structural
members and engineered wood products shall be in accordance
with this code.
K111.6 Smoke alarm circuits. Single- and multiple-station
smoke alarms required by this code and installed within dwell-
ing units shall not be connected as the only load on a branch cir-
cuit. Such alarms shall be supplied by branch circuits having
lighting loads consisting of lighting outlets in habitable spaces.
K111.7 Equipment and door labeling. Doors into electrical
control panel rooms shall be marked with a plainly visible and
legible sign stating ELECTRICAL ROOM or similar approved
wording. The disconnecting means for each service, feeder or
branch circuit originating on a switchboard or panelboard shall
be legibly and durably marked to indicate its purpose unless
such purpose is clearly evident.

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

643

46_appK_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo &_appK_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:26:00 AM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

644

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE®

46_appK_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo &_appK_ibc_2009.vp
Thursday, February 19, 2009 11:26:00 AM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

A

ACCESS OPENINGS
Attic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.2
Crawl space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.1
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.3.2
Fire damper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 716.4
Fire depar tment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.17
Mechanical appliances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.3
Refuse/laundry chutes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.13.3
ACCESSIBILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007, Chapter 11,
3411, Appendix E
Airpor ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.6, E110
Assembly seating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2, 1109.10
Bus stops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E108
Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.12
Detectable warnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.9
Detention and correctional facilities . . . . . . 1103.2.14,
1107.5.5, 1108.4.2,
3411.8.7, E104.1
Dining areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.10
Dr inking fountains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.5
Dwelling units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1107, 3411.1,
3411.8.7, 3411.8.8, 3411.8.9
Egress (see ACCESSIBLE MEANS
OF EGRESS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.2.1, 1007.4,
1109.6, 3001.3, 3411.8.2
Employee work areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.2,
1103.2.3, 1104.3.1
Entrances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1105, 3411.8.1, 3411.9.3
Escalators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.8.4
Existing buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 1103.2.2,
3411, 3412.2.5
Fuel dispensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.13, 3411.8.13
Histor ic buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.9
Judicial facilities . . . . . . . 1108.4, 3411.8.7, 3411.8.10
Kitchens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.4
Laundry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E105.2
Lifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.5, 1109.7, 3411.8.3
Live/work unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.7, 1103.2.13
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.2
Parking and passenger loading facilities . . . . . . 1106
Performance areas . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2.8, 3411.8.6
Platform . . . . . . . 1104.4, 1108.2.8, 3411.8.6, E103.1
Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010, 3411.8.5
Recreational facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.14
Route . . . . 1104, 1107.4, 3411.7, 3411.9.1, 3411.9.2
Scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.2, 116.1, 1101,
1103.1, 3411.1, E101.1
Seating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2, 1109.10
Service facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.11, 3411.8.12
Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1110, E107
Sleeping units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1107, 3411.8.7,
3411.8.8, 3411.8.9
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.3, 1109.8
Telephone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E106

Toilet and bathing facilities . . . . . . . . . 1109.2, 1109.3,
3411.8.11, 3411.9.4, E105.1
Train and light rail stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E109
Transient lodging . . . . 1103.2.11, 1107.6.1, 3411.8.7,
3411.8.9, E104.2, E104.3
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS . . . . . . . . . . 1007
Areas of refuge (see AREA OF REFUGE)
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 1028.8
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.2.1, 1007.4, 1007.8
Existing building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 3411.6
Exterior area for assisted rescue (see EXTERIOR
AREA FOR ASSISTED RESCUE)
Hor izontal exit (see HORIZONTAL EXIT)
Mezzanine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505, 1007.1
Platform lift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.5
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1
Stairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.3
Signage . . . . . . . . . . 1007.8 through 1007.11, 3002.3
ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES . . . 303.1, 305.1, 508.2
Incidental accessory occupancies . . 508.2.5, 707.3.6
ADDITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3403, D103.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.5
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3302.1, 3310
ADMINISTRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 1
ADOBE CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1, 2109.3
AEROSOLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.1, 307.2, 311.2,
414.1.2.1, 414.2.5, 907.2.16
AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS
(see GROUP U). . . . . 312.1, 1103.2.5, Appendix C
AIR CONDITIONING
(see MECHANICAL) . . . . . . 101.4.2, 2801.1, 3006.2
AIR INTAKES (see YARDS OR COURTS) . . . 1206.3.2
AIRCRAFT HANGARS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4
Aircraft paint hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.6, 507.9
Basements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.2
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.1, 412.6.2
Fire area. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.6.2
Fire suppression system . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.6, 412.6.5
Helipor ts and helistops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7
Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.5, 907.2.21
Unlimited height and area . . . . . . . . . . . . 504.1, 507.9
AIRCRAFT-RELATED OCCUPANCIES . . . . 412, E110
Airpor t traffic control towers . . . . . . . . 412.3, 907.2.22
Construction type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.2
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.3
Fire detection systems, automatic . . . . . . . . . 412.3.4,
907.2.22
Standby power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.5, 2702.2.18
Traffic control towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3
Type of construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.2
AISLE
Assembly seating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.6
Bleachers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Check-out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.11.2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

645

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:56 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Converging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.9.3
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017
Folding and telescopic seating . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Grandstands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Obstructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.9.6
Tents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103.4
Walking surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.11
Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.9
ALARM SYSTEMS, EMERGENCY . . . . . . . . . . . . 908
ALARMS, FIRE (see FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE
DETECTION SYSTEMS)
ALARMS, VISIBLE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3
Common areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.1
Employee work areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.5.3.2
Group I-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.3
Group R-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.3
Group R-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.4
Public areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.1
ALARMS, VOICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.2
Amusement buildings, special . . . . . . 411.6, 2702.2.1
Covered mall buildings . . . . . . . . . . . 402.14, 402.15,
907.2.20, 2702.2.14
High-r ise buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.3, 907.2.13
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.6
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.9.1,
907.2.18, 907.2.19
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1
Load combinations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605.3
Masonry design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.2.1, 2107
Wood design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2301.2, 2306
ALTERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3404, D103.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.6, 3411.7, 3411.9
Compliance alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . 3302.1, 3310.2, 3411.6
ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS,
DESIGN AND METHODS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.11
ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICES . . . . . . . . . . 1009.10
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.10.2
Equipment platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5
Galleries, catwalks and gridirons . . 410.5.3, 1015.6.1
Helipor ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7.3
ALUMINUM . . . . . . . . . 1404.5.1, 1604.3.5, Chapter 20
AMBULATORY HEALTH CARE FACILITIES . . . . . 422
Fire alarm and smoke detection . . . . . . . . . 907.2.2.1
Smoke compar tment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422.2, 422.4
AMUSEMENT BUILDING, SPECIAL . . . . . . . . . . . 411
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.1
Emergency voice/alarm
communications system . . . . . . . . . 411.6, 907.2.12
Exit marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.7
Fire detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.3, 411.5, 907.2.12
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.8
Smoke detection system . . . . 411.3, 411.5, 907.2.12
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.4
AMUSEMENT PARK STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . . . . 303
ANCHOR STORE (see COVERED MALL
AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402
Construction type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.6

Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.3.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.1.1, 402.4.1.3
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.7.1, 402.7.3
Sprinkler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.9
ANCHORAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8
Braced wall line sills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.3
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1911, 1912
Conventional light-frame
construction . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.11.3.1, 2308.12.7,
2308.12.8, 2308.12.9
Decks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.3
Seismic anchorage for masonry chimneys . . . 2113.4
Seismic anchorage for masonry fireplaces . . . 2111.4
Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.2
Wood sill plates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.3
APARTMENT HOUSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
APPEALS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
ARCHITECT (see definition for REGISTERED
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL)
ARCHITECTURAL TRIM . . . 603.1, 1406.2.2, D102.2.7
AREA, BUILDING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 5
Aircraft control towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.2
Aircraft hangars, residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.5.5
Covered mall building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.6
Enclosed parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . 509.2, 509.3,
509.4, 509.9
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505
Membrane structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102.4
Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.2, 505.5
Mixed construction types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102.6
Mixed occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508
Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506, 509
Open mall building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.6
Open parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.6, 406.3.7,
509.2, 509.3, 509.4,
509.7, 509.8, 509.9
Private garages and carpor ts . . . . . . 406.1.1, 406.1.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503.1.3, 506.2.1, 507
AREA FOR ASSISTED RESCUE, EXTERIOR
(see EXTERIOR AREAS FOR ASSISTED RESCUE)
AREA OF REFUGE
(see ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS)
Requirements . . . . . . . . . 1007.6, 1007.6.1, 1007.6.2
Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.9, 1007.10, 1007.11
Two-way communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.6.3,
1007.8, 1007.11
Where required . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.2, 1007.3, 1007.4
ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY (GROUP A) . . . . 303, 1028
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017.4, 1028.9
Amusement buildings, special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Bleachers (see BLEACHERS)
Egress, special provisions . . . . . . . 1008.1.10, 1028.3
Fire alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.1
Folding and telescopic seating . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1, 1028.14
Grandstands (see GRANDSTANDS)
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509

646

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:56 PM

2

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.1
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.9.1.4, 1607.11.2.2
Motion picture theaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409, 507.11
Occupancy category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1604.5
Panic hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.10, 1008.2.1
Parking beneath or above . . . . . . 509.2, 509.7. 509.9
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Seating, fixed (see SEATING, FIXED)
Seating, smoke-protected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.6.2
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1,
Table 508.2.5, Table 508.4
Sprinklers . . . . . 507.3, 507.6, 507.7, 507.11, 903.2.1
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410
Standby power systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.2.1
Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.3.2, 905.5.1
Travel distance . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2, 1028.7
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . 507.3, 507.6, 507.7, 507.11
ASSISTED LIVING (see RESIDENTIAL
CARE/ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES)
ATRIUM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404
Automatic sprinkler protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.3
Enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.6, 707.3.5
Fire alarm system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.4, 907.2.14
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.8
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.5, 909
Standby power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.7
Travel distance . . . . . . 404.9, 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.2
ATTIC
Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.2
Combustible storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413.2
Draftstopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.4
Insulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.3.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Unusable space fire protection . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.3.3
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.2
AUDITORIUM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2
Foyers and lobbies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.4
Interior balconies and galler ies . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.5
Motion picture projection rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410
AUTOMOBILE PARKING GARAGE (see GARAGE,
AUTOMOBILE PARKING) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406
AWNINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105
Design and construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.3
Drainage, water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3201.4
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . 3202.2.3,
3202.3.1, 3202.4
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.8
Live load . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.11.2.1, 1607.11.4
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.4
Motor vehicle service stations . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5.3
Permanent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.8
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.10

INDEX

B

BALCONIES
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2.4
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.5
Construction, exterior. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1406.3
Egress, means of . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.2, 1019, 1028.5
Emergency escape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.1
Exterior egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.2
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.2, 1406.3
Public right-of-way encroachments . . . . . . . 3202.3.2,
3202.3.3
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.2
BARBECUES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2801
BARRIERS
Fire (see FIRE BARRIER)
Pedestr ian protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306
Smoke (see SMOKE BARRIER)
Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.4, 1602.1, 1607.7.3
BASEMENT (see UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS)
Aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.2
Area modification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506.4, 506.5
Considered a story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 502.1
Emergency escape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.1
Flood loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1612.2, 1612.5
Height modifications for . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509.5
Prohibited . . . 415.1, 415.4, 415.5, 415.8.5.2.2, 418.1
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.11.1
Waterproofing and dampproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805
BASEMENT WALLS
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1904.3, 1909.6.1
Soil loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1610.1
Waterproofing and dampproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805
BASIC WIND SPEED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.3
BAY AND ORIEL WINDOWS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1406.4
Public right-of-way encroachments . . . . . . . 3202.3.2,
3202.3.3
BLEACHERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1, 1028.1.1, 3401.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.7
BLOCK (see CONCRETE BLOCK
AND GLASS UNIT MASONRY)
BOARD OF APPEALS . . . . . . . . . . . . 113, Appendix B
Application for appeal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B101.1
Alternate members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B101.2.1
Board decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B101.4
Limitations on authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113.2
Membership of board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B101.2
Notice of meeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B101.3
Qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113.3, B101.2.2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

647

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:56 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

BOILER ROOM
Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3
BOLTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2204.2
Anchors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1911, 1912, 2204.2.1
High strength, steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.3.3
BONDING, MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.9, 2109.2
BRACED WALL LINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2308.3
Bracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2309.3
Seismic requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.12.2,
2308.12.4, 2308.12.6
Sill anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.3
Spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.1
Suppor t
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.4
BRACED WALL PANEL . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2308.9.3
Alternative bracing . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.3.1, 2308.9.3.2
Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3.2
BRICK (see MASONRY)
BUILDING
Access, fire depar tment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.17
Area (see AREA, BUILDING) . . . . . . . . . . 502.1, 503,
505, 506, 507, 508, 509
Demolition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303
Existing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 34
Fire walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.1
Height (see HEIGHT, BUILDING) . . . . . . . . . . . 502.1,
503, 504, 505,
506, 508, 509
Occupancy classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 3
Par ty walls. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.1.1
BUILDING DEPARTMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
BUILDING OFFICIAL
Duties and powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A101.1
Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.7
Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A101.4
BUILT-UP ROOFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.10
BUSINESS OCCUPANCY (GROUP B) . . . . . . . . . . 304
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017.2
Ambulatory health care facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Educational . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1, 304.1
Fire alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.2
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Parking under or above . . 509.2, 509.7, 509.8, 509.9
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Special occupancy separation . . 303.1, Table 508.2.5
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.3, 507.4

C

CABLES, STEEL STRUCTURAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2207
CALCULATED FIRE RESISTANCE
(see FIRE RESISTANCE, CALCULATED)

CANOPIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105
Design and construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.3
Drainage, water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3201.4
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . . 3202.3.1
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.8
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1,
1607.11.2.1, 1607.11.4
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.4
Motor vehicle service stations . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5.3
Permanent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.8
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.10
CARE FACILITIES (see HEALTH CARE)
CARPET
Floor covering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804.2
Textile ceiling finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.6
Textile wall coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.5
CATWALKS
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.2, 1015.6.1
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.6
CEILING
Acoustical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 808
Height . . . . . . . . 409.2, 909.20.4.3, 1205.2.2, 1208.2
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803
Penetration of fire resistant assemblies . . . . . . 713.4,
716.2, 716.6
Suspended acoustical. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 808.1.1
CELLULOSE NITRATE FILM . . . . . . . 409.1, 903.2.5.3
CERAMIC TILE
Material requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.5
Mor tar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.10
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY . . 106.2, 111, 3408.2
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY . . . . . . . . . . 3408, D103.2
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.4, 3412.2.5
CHILD CARE (see DAY CARE) . . . . . . 305.2, 308.3.1,
308.5.2, 310.1
CHIMNEYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1, 2111, 2112, 2113
Factory-built . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.5
Flashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.6
Protection from adjacent construction . . . . . . . 3307.1
CHURCHES
(see RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACES OF)
CIRCULAR STAIRS (see CURVED STAIRWAYS)
CLAY ROOF TILE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716.2
CLINIC
Hospital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3
Outpatient (see AMBULATORY
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES). . . . . . . . 304.1.1, 422
COAL POCKETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.6
CODES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.2, 101.4, 102.3,
102.4, 102.6, Chapter 35
COLD STORAGE (see FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION)
COLD-FORMED STEEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2202.1, 2209
Light-frame construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.3.1.2, 1704.3.4,
1706.3, 1707.4

648

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:57 PM

4

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

COMBUSTIBLE DUSTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS . . . . . . 307.4, 307.5, 415.6.2
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
Concealed spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413.2, 717.5
Exterior side of exterior wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1406
High-pile stock or rack storage . . . . . . 413.1, 910.2.2
Type I and Type II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603, 805
COMBUSTIBLE PROJECTIONS . . . . . . 705.2, 1406.3
COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE . . . . . . . . . . . 413, 910.2.2
COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL . . . . . . 1014.3
COMPARTMENTATION
Ambulatory Health Care Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . 422.2
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.6
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4
Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412.6.3
COMPLIANCE ALTERNATIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412
COMPRESSED GAS . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2, 415.8.7.2.2
CONCEALED SPACES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413.2, 717
CONCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 19
ACI 318 modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . 1901.2, 1901.3,
1902.1, 1903.1, 1908
Anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1911, 1912
Calculated fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.2
Conduits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1901.4
Construction joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906
Cur ing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.11
Durability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1904
Exposure conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1904
Footings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809
Formwork . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906
Foundation walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.5, 1808.8
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4.1, 1903
Mixing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.8
Pipe columns, concrete-filled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1915
Pipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906
Placing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905
Plain, structural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1909
Propor tioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.2
Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905
Reinforced gypsum concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1914
Reinforcement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1907
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
Roof tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.3, 1716.2
Shotcrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1913
Slab, minimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1910
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4, Table 1704.4
Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1903
Strength testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4.1, 1905.6
Wood suppor t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.12
CONCRETE MASONRY
Calculated fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.2, 2108, 2109
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.1
Surface bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2105.2.2.2, 2105.3

INDEX

Wood suppor t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.12
CONCRETE ROOF TILE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.3
Wind resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.5.3, 1716.2
CONDOMINIUM (see APARTMENT HOUSES)
CONDUIT, PENETRATION PROTECTION . . . . . 713.3,
1022.4
CONFLICTS IN CODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102.1
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . 310
CONSTRUCTION (see SAFEGUARDS DURING
CONSTRUCTION)
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS . . . . . . . . . 107, 1603
Concrete construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1901.4
Design load bear ing capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.6
Fire alarm and detection systems . . . . . . . . . 907.1.1
Fire-resistant-joint systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 714
Flood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.7
Floor live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.1
Geotechnical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.6
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.3
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.3
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713
Permit application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.1
Retention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.5
Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.3
Roof assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503
Roof live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.2
Roof snow load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.3
Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.5, 1603.1.9
Site plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.5
Soil classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.6
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1703, 1705
Special loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.8
Structural tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1703
Systems and components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.9
Temporary structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103.2
Wind load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.4
CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906.4
Shotcrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1913.7
CONSTRUCTION TYPES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Aircraft related. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.2
Automobile parking garage . . . . . . . . . Table 406.3.3,
509.2, 509.3, 509.4,
509.7, 509.8, 509.9
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 602
Combustible material in
Type I and Type II construction . . . . . . . . . 603, 805
Covered mall and open mall buildings . . . . . . . . 402.6
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.3
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, Table 602
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2
Type I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602.2, 603
Type II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602.2, 603
Type III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602.3
Type IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602.4
Type V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602.5
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.2
CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES . . . 901.5, 1706

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

649

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:57 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

CONTROL AREA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2, 707.3.7
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2.4
Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2.3
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . 2301.2, 2302.1, 2308
Additional seismic requirements . . . 2308.11, 2308.12
Braced wall lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.3
Connections and fasteners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.5
Design of elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.4
Floor joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.8
Foundation plates or sills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.6
Girders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.7
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.2
Roof and ceiling framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10
Wall framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9
CONVEYING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3005
CORNICES
Draftstopping. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.6
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.2.1
Projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.2, 1406.3
Public right-of-way encroachments . . . . . . . 3202.3.2,
3202.3.3

CORRIDOR (see CORRIDOR PROTECTION,
EXIT ACCESS and FIRE PARTITIONS) . . . . . . 1018
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.6
Dead end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.4
Elevation change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.5
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.2
Hazardous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.2.2, 415.8.2.7,
415.8.3, 415.8.4, 415.8.6, 415.8.7.1.4
Headroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.2, 1003.3
HPM service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.5.2
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.1, 1018.1
Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.3, 1018.2
CORRIDOR PROTECTION, EXIT ACCESS
Construction, fire protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.1,
Table 1018.1, 1018.6
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.3
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804.4
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715, 716.5.4.1
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.5, 1018.5.1
CORROSIVES . . . . . . . 307.6, Table 414.2.5(1), 414.3,
415.7.3,Table 415.8.2.1.1
COURTS (see YARDS OR COURTS) . . . . . . . . . . 1206
COVERED MALL AND
OPEN MALL BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402
Construction type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.6
Fire depar tment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.3, 402.17
Fire detection/alarm system . . . . . 402.4.5.1, 402.11,
402.12.2, 402.15,
907.2.20, 2702.2.14
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.8
Kiosk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4, 402.5, 402.13
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.1

Playground structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.12
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.7
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.16
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.10
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.9
Standby power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.14, 2702.2.14
Standpipe system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.9.1, 905.3.3
Travel distance . . . . . . 402.4, 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
COVERED WALKWAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306.7
CRAWL SPACE
Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.1
Drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.1.2
Unusable space fire protection . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.3.3
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.3
CRIPPLE WALL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2308.9.4
CRYOGENIC . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 307.1,Table 414.5.1,
Table 415.8.2.1.1

D

DAMPERS (see FIRE DAMPERS
AND SMOKE DAMPERS) . . . . . 716.2 through 716.5
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING . . . . 1805
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2, 1805.3
Subsoil drainage system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.4
DAY CARE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305.2, 308.5, 310.1
Adult care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.5.1
Child care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.5.2, 310.1
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.5.2, Table 1004.1.1,
Table 1015.1, Table 1021.2
DAY SURGERY CENTER (see AMBULATORY
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES)
DEAD END . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.4
DEAD LOAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1606
Foundation design load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.3
DECK
Anchorage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.3
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
DEFLECTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.1
Framing suppor ting glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.3
Preconstruction load tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.3.2
Wood diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305
Wood shear walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305
DEMOLITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303
DESIGN STRENGTH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 2102.1
Conformance to standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1711.1
New materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1711.2
DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM . . . . . . . . . . . 1702.1
Seismic qualification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708.4
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1707.8
DIAPHRAGMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 2302.1
Flexible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.6.1
Special inspection. . . . . . . . 1704.6.1, 1706.2, 1707.3
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305, 2306.2
DOORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008
Access-controlled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.4
Emergency escape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.1

650

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:57 PM

6

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Fire (see OPENING PROTECTIVES) . . . . . . . 715.4,
1022.3, 1022.4
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.7, 715.5, 1405.13
Hazardous storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.5.6
Hardware (see LOCKS AND LATCHES) . . . . 1005.3,
1008.1.4.4,
1008.1.9, 1008.1.10
Hor izontal sliding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.3
Hydrogen cutoff rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421.4.1
Landings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.5, 1008.1.6
Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.3, 1008.1.9
Panic and fire exit hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.10
Power operated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.2
Revolving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.1
Secur ity grilles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.5
Side swinging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.2
Smoke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.5, 711.5
Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.10
Stairways, high-rise. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.3
Structural testing, exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5
Thresholds . . . 1003.5, 1008.1.5, 1008.1.7, 3411.8.14
Vestibule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.7
Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.1, 1008.1.1.1
DRAFTSTOPPING
Attics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.4
Floor-ceiling assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3
DRY CLEANING PLANTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.4
DRYING ROOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417
DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS
(see MECHANICAL)
DUMBWAITERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14
DWELLING UNITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . 1102, 1103.2.4, 1103.2.12,
1105.1.6, 1106.2, 1107
Accessibility, existing . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.1, 3411.8.7,
3411.8.8, 3411.8.9
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1208.3, 1208.4
Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310
Live/work units (see LIVE/WORK UNITS)
Scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.2
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.2, 420.3
Sound transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1207

E

EARTHQUAKE LOADS (see SEISMIC) . . . . . . . . 1613
EAVES (see COMBUSTIBLE PROJECTIONS
AND CORNICES)
EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP E) . . . . . . 305
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Accessory assembly spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.1, 1018.2
Day care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305.2, 308.5, 310.1
Education for students above the 12th grade . . . . 304
Egress, special provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.10
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.3
Gyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508

INDEX

Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Manual fire alarm boxes . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.3, 907.4.2
Occupancy category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1604.5
Panic hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.10
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Religious facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Special occupancy separation . . 303.1, Table 508.2.5
Sprinkler system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.3
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.10
EGRESS (see MEANS OF EGRESS) . . . . . Chapter 10
ELECTRICAL . . . . 105.2, 112, Chapter 27, Appendix K
ELEVATOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 30
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.2.1, 1007.4,
1007.8, 1109.6, 3001.3, 3411.8.2
Car size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3001.3, 3002.4
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14, 1607.8.1
Control values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412.6.14
Conveying systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3005
Emergency operations . . . . . . . . . . . . 3002.3, 3002.5,
3003, 3007, 3008
Fire service access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6.1, 3007
Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2409, 3002.8
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . 403.2.3, 403.4.7, 403.4.8, 403.6
Hoistway enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.3, 708,
1022.3, 3002, 3005.3.1
Hoistway venting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3004
Lobby . . . . 708.14.1, 709.1, 1007.4, 3007.4, 3008.11
Machine rooms . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.8, 3006
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6, 1003.7,
1007.2.1, 1007.4, 3008
Number of elevator cars in hoistway . . . . . . . . 3002.2
Occupant evacuation elevators . . . . . . 403.6.2, 3008
Personnel and mater ial hoists . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3005.4
Roof access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.14
Seismic controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.6.5
Shaft enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . 914, 1007.8.2, 3002.3, 3008.11.5
Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3001
Standby power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.2.5, 2702.2.19
Underground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4.3
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS
Accessible means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.8
Alarms (see FIRE ALARMS)
Elevators, occupant evacuation . . . . . . . . . . . . 3008.5
Fire command center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.5, 911
Radio coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.4, 915
EMERGENCY EGRESS OPENINGS . . . . . . . . . . 1029
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1021.2, 1029.1
Window wells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.5
EMERGENCY LIGHTING . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1006, 1205.5
EMERGENCY POWER . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.1, 2702.3
Exit signs . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.5.3, 2702.2.3, 2702.2.9
Group A. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.2.1
Group I-3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.4.2, 2702.2.17
Hazardous . . . . . . . . . . . 414.5.4, 415.8.10, 2702.2.8,
2702.2.10, 2702.2.11, 2702.2.13

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

651

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:58 PM

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.8, 2702.2.15
Means of egress illumination . . . . . . 1006.3, 2702.2.4
Semiconductor fabrication . . . . . . 415.8.10, 2702.2.8
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . 405.9, 2702.2.16
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS
Additional exit stairway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.2
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6, 1007.2.1, 3002.4,
3003, 3007, 3008
Fire command center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.5, 911
Fire depar tment access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.17
Radio coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.4, 915
Roof access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.13
Safety features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 914
EMPIRICAL DESIGN OF MASONRY . . 2101.2.4, 2109
Adobe construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.3
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.1
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.5
Surface-bonded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.2
EMPLOYEE
Accessibility for work areas . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.2,
1103.2.3, 1104.3.1
Qualifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A101
Termination of employment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A101.4
ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF- WAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 32
END-JOINTED LUMBER. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.1
ENERGY EFFICIENCY . . 101.4.6, 110.3.7, Chapter 13
ENGINEER (see definition for REGISTERED
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL)
EQUIVALENT OPENING FACTOR . . . . . . Figure 705.7
ESCALATORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3005
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.8.4
Floor opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.7
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES (see OCCUPANCY
CATEGORY) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL . . . . . 1804, 3304
EXISTING BUILDING . . . . . . . . . . . . 102.6, Chapter 34
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1103.2.2, 3411
Additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3403, D103.1
Alteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3404, D103.1
Change of occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3408, D103.2
Flood resistant . . . . . 3401.2, 3403.2, 3404.2, 3405.5,
3409.2, 3412.2.4.1, Appendix G
Histor ic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3409, 3411.9
Moved structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3410, D103.3
Repairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3405
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
EXIT (see MEANS OF EGRESS) . . 1020 through 1026
Boiler rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2
Enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.3.2, 1022.1
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.3, 1022
Furnace rooms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3
Group H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.4.4, 415.8.5.5
Hor izontal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.3.3, 1025
Incinerator rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3
Interior finish. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804

Luminous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.5, 411.7.1, 1024
Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.3, 505.4, 1004.6
Number, minimum . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5, 1015.1, 1021
Passageway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1023
Ramps, exterior. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1026
Refrigerated rooms or spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.5
Refrigeration machinery rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.4
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011
Stairs, exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1026
Travel distance . . . . . . . 104.2.2, 402.4, 404.9, 407.4,
408.6.1, 408.8.1, 411.4, 1014.3,
1015.5, 1016, 1021.2, 1028.7
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.7
EXIT ACCESS
(see MEANS OF EGRESS) . . . . . 1014 through 1019
Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017
Balconies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.2, 1019
Common path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3
Corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1005.2, 1008, 1015, 1020.2
Intervening space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.2
Path of egress travel, common . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3
Seating at tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017.3
Single exit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.1.1, 1021.2
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4, 404.9, 407.4,
408.6.1, 408.8.1, 411.4, 1014.2.2,
1014.3, 1015.5, 1016, 1021.2, 1028.7
EXIT DISCHARGE (see MEANS OF EGRESS) . . 1027
Cour ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.5
Hor izontal exit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
Lobbies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
Marquees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3106.4
Open parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
Public way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.6
Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.2
Vestibules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
EXIT PASSAGEWAY
(see MEANS OF EGRESS) . . . . . . . . . 707.3.3, 1023
EXIT SIGNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.3
Illumination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.2, 1011.4, 1011.5
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.1
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.7
EXPLOSIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 414.5.1,
Table 415.3.1, Table 415.3.2
EXPOSURE CATEGORY (see WIND LOAD) . . 1609.4
EXTERIOR AREAS FOR ASSISTED RESCUE
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.7
Signage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.9, 1007.10, 1007.11
Where required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.2
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND
FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1408
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.14
EXTERIOR WALLS
(see WALLS, EXTERIOR) . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 602,
705, Chapter 14

652

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:58 PM

8

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

F

FACTORY OCCUPANCY (GROUP F) . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.1, 503, 503.1.1,
505, 506, 507, 508
Dead end corr idor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.4
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.4
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Low hazard occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306.3
Moderate hazard occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306.2
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Smoke and heat vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 910.2
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1015.4,
1015.5, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.2, 507.3, 507.4
FARM BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix C
FEES, PERMIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Refunds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109.6
Related fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109.5
Work commencing before issuance . . . . . . . . . 109.4
FENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.2, 312.1
FIBERBOARD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2303.1.5
Shear wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.6
FILL MATERIAL. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1804, 3304
FINGER-JOINTED LUMBER
(see END-JOINTED LUMBER)
FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS
Aerosol storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.16
Aircraft hangars, residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.21
Airpor t traffic control towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.4
Ambulatory care facilities . . . . . . . . . 422.6, 907.2.2.1
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.1
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.14
Audible alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.9.2
Battery room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.23
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.1.1
Covered mall and open mall . . . . . 402.4.5.1, 402.11,
402.12.2, 402.15, 907.2.20
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.3
Emergency system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 908
Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.4
Group H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.5, 907.2.15
Group I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.6, 907.5.2.3.3
Group M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.7
Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.8, 907.2.9, 907.2.10,
907.2.11, 907.5.2.3.3, 907.5.2.3.4
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.2, 907.2.13
Institutional occupancy . . . . . 407.2.1, 407.2.3, 407.6
Live/work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.5, 907.2.9
Lumber mills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.17
Occupancy requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . 411.3, 411.5,
907.2.12
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . 907.2.18, 907.2.19

INDEX

Visible alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.4.2
FIRE AREA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 901.7
Ambulatory health care facilities . . . . 903.2.2, 907.2.2
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.1
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.3
Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.4
Institutional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.6
Mercantile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.7
Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.8
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.9, 903.2.10
FIRE BARRIERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6, 707, 708
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.5, 708.4
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 602, 707.4, 708.6
Fire-resistance rating of walls . . . . . . . . . . 603.1(21),
603.1(22), 603.1(25),
703, 707.3, 708.3
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Incidental accessory occupancies . . . . . . . . 508.2.5.1
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.8, 708.9, 714, 2508.4
Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.2, 708.3
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . 707.6, 707.9, 708.7,
708.10, 713.3, 715, 716.5.2
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.7, 708.8
Shaft enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.1
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.4
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.3, 404.6
Covered malls . . . . . . . . . 402.4.6, 402.7.1, 402.7.3
Fire pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 913.2.1
Flammable finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416.2
Group H-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.2, 415.6.2.2
Group H-3 and H-4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.7
Group H-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.2.2, 415.8.2.5,
415.8.5.2, 415.8.6.3
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.5, 408.7
Hazardous mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2
High-r ise. . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.1.2, 403.3, 403.4.7.1
Hydrogen cutoff rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421.4
Organic coating . . . . . . . . . . . . 418.4, 418.5, 418.6
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.1, 410.5.2
FIRE COMMAND CENTER . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.5, 911
FIRE DAMPERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 716.2 through 716.5
FIRE DEPARTMENT (see EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS)
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM (see FIRE ALARM
AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS)
FIRE DISTRICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix D
FIRE DOOR (see OPENING
PROTECTIVES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715, 1022.3, 1022.4
FIRE ESCAPE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7.3, 3406
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS, PORTABLE . . . . . . 906, 3309
FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . 416.5,
417.4, 903, 904
FIRE PARTITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6, 709
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.4

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

653

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:59 PM

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 602, 709.5
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . 603.1(21), 603.1(22),
603.1(25), 703, 709.3
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Joint treatment gypsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2508.4
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.8, 714
Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.2
Opening protection . . . . . . 709.6, 713.3, 715, 716.5.4
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.7, 709.9, 713, 716
Special provisions
Covered mall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.7.2
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.7
Group I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.2
FIRE PREVENTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.5
FIRE PROTECTION
Explosion control . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.5.1, 415.6.1.4,
415.8.5.4, 421.7
Fire extinguishers, por table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 906
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.2
Smoke and heat vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 910
Smoke control systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909
Sprinkler systems, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 9
FIRE PUMPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5, 913, 914.2
FIRE RESISTANCE
Calculated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721
Conditions of restraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2.3
Ducts and air transfer openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 716
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 602, 705.5, 709.5
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.5
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2
Joint systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 714
Prescr iptive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 720
Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6, 703, 705.5, 707.3.9
Roof assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505
Structural members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703
Thermal and sound insulating materials . . . . . . 719.1
FIRE RESISTANCE, CALCULATED . . . . . . . . . . . . 721
Clay brick and tile masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.4
Concrete assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.2
Concrete masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.3
Steel assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.5
Wood assemblies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.6
FIRE-RETARDANT-TREATED WOOD . . . . . . . 2302.1,
2303.2
Awnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.3
Balconies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1406.3
Canopies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105.3
Concealed spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.5
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9.5
Fire wall ver tical continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.6
Par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603.1
Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4
Projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.2.3
Roof construction . . . Table 601, 705.11, 706.6, 1505
Shakes and shingles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505.6

Type I and II construction . . . . . . 603.1(10), 603.1(25)
Type III construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 602.3
Type IV construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 602.4
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE . . . . . . Table 602, 702
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1406.2.1.1
FIRE SERVICE
ACCESS ELEVATORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6.1, 3007
FIRE SHUTTER (see OPENING
PROTECTIVES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4, 715.4.9,
715.4.10, 715.5
FIRE WALLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706
Aircraft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.6.2
Combustible framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.7
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.5, 706.6
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 602, 706.5.1
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703, 706.4
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.10, 714
Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.3
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.8, 706.11,
713.3, 715, 716.5.1
Penetration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.9, 713.3, 713.4
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.6.2
Covered malls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.7.3
Group H-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.2.6
Private garages and carpor ts . . . . . . . . . . . 406.1.2
Structural stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.2
FIRE WINDOWS (see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
FIREBLOCKING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2
Chimneys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.5, 2113.20
Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.12
Wood construction . . . . . . 717.2.1, 717.2.7, 1406.2.4
Wood stairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.4
FIREPLACES, FACTORY-BUILT . . . . . . . . . . 2111.14.1
FIREPLACES, MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Combustibles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.11
General provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111
Hear th extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.9, 2111.10
Steel units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.5.1
FIREWORKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2, 307.3, 307.5
FLAMESPREAD . . . . . . . . . . 802, 803.1.1, Table 803.9
FLAMMABLE FINISHES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.1, 416
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS . . . . . . . . . . 307.4, 307.5, 406,
412, 414, 415
FLAMMABLE SOLIDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.5, 415
FLASHING
Roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.2, 1503.6, 1507.2.9,
1507.3.9, 1507.5.7, 1507.7.7,
1507.8.8, 1507.9.9, 1510.6
Wall, veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.4, 1405.12.7
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1107.7.5
Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G101 through G105

654

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:59 PM

10

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Elevation cer tificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.3
Existing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3403.2, 3404.2,
3405.5, 3409.2, 3412.2.4.1
Flood elevation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.5.1, 1612
Flood loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1, 1603.1.7,
1612, 3001.2, 3102.7
Flood resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1403.5, 1403.6
Flood resistant construction . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix G
Grading and fill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1804.4, 1805.1.2.1
Histor ic buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G105.3
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801.1.3
Manufacturered homes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G501
Recreational vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G601
Site improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G401
Site plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.5
Subdivisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G301
Tanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G701
Temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G901
Utility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G1001
Ventilation, under floor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.3.2
FLOOR/CEILING (see FLOOR CONSTRUCTION)
FLOOR CONSTRUCTION (see FLOOR
CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
Draftstopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3
Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804, 805, 1003.4, 1210.1
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601, 712
Loads (see FLOOR LOADS)
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Penetration of fire-resistant assemblies . . 712, 713.4,
716.2, 716.6

FLOOR CONSTRUCTION, WOOD
Beams and girders . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11.2.1, 2308.7
Bridging/blocking . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.8.5, 2308.10.6
Diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305.1
Fastening schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9.1
Framing . . . . . . Table 602.4, 602.4.2, 602.4.4, 2304.4
Joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.8
Sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7
FLOOR LEVEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.5, 1008.1.5
FLOOR LOADS
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2
Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.1, 1607
Posting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106.1
FLOOR OPENING PROTECTION (see VERTICAL
OPENING PROTECTION)
FOAM PLASTICS
Attics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.1, 2603.4.1.6
Cold storage . . . . . . . . . . 2603.3, 2603.4.1.2, 2603.5
Concealed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603
Covered mall and open mall buildings . . . . . 402.16.5
Crawl space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.6
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.7 through 2603.4.1.9
Exterior walls of multistory buildings . . . . . . . . 2603.5
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801.2.2, 2603.9, 2604
Label/identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.2
Metal composite materials (MCM) . . . . . . . . 1407.1.1,
1407.13
Roofing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.5

INDEX

Siding backer board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.10
Stages and platform scenery . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.6
Surface burning character istics . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.3
Thermal barrier requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.5.2
Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.3, 2604.2
Type I and II construction . . . . . . . . 603.1(1), 603.1(2)
Walk-in coolers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.3
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING . . . 1028.1.1,
3401.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.7
FOOD COURT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.2
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.1.4
FOOTBOARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.14.2
FORMWORK, CONCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906
FOUNDATION (see FOUNDATION, DEEP
and FOUNDATION, SHALLOW) . . . . . . . Chapter 18
Basement . . . . . . . . . . 1610, 1805.1.1, 1806.3, 1807
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.8, 1809.8, 1810.3.2.1
Dampproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . . . 3202.1
Formwork . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906, 3304.1
Geotechnical investigation
(see SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS) . . . . . . . . . 1803
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.1
Load-bear ing value . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1806, 1808, 1810
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.9
Pedestr ian protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306.9
Pier (see FOUNDATION, SHALLOW)
Pile (see FOUNDATION, DEEP)
Plates or sills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.6
Protection from adjacent
construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303.5, 3307.1
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4, 1704.8,
1704.9, 1704.10, 1704.11
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.11, 1810.3.2.2, 1018.3.2.3
Timber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.12, 1810.3.2.4
Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.3
FOUNDATION, DEEP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1802.1, 1810
Dr illed shaft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1802.1
Existing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.10.1.2
Geotechnical investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.5.5
Grade beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1810.3.12
Helical pile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1802.1, 1810.3.1.5,
Table 1810.3.2.6, 1810.3.3.1.9,
1810.3.5.3.3, 1810.4.11, 1810.4.12
Micropile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1802.1, Table 1808.8.1,
Table 1810.3.2.6, 1810.3.5.2.3,
1810.3.10, 1810.4.10
Piles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1808.8.1, 1809.12,
1810, 1810.3.1.4
FOUNDATION, SHALLOW . . . . . . . . . . . . 1802.1, 1809
Piers and cur tain wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.10
Slab-on-grade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.6.2
Strip footing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.8, 1809

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

655

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:00:59 PM

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

FOYERS
Assembly occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.4, 1028.9.5
Corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.6
Covered mall and open mall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.1
FRAME INSPECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.4
FRATERNITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310
FROST PROTECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.5
FURNACE ROOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3

G

GALLERIES
Means of egress . . . . . . . . 410.3.2, 1015.6.1, 1028.5
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.6
GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE PARKING (see PARKING
GARAGES)
GARAGE, REPAIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6
Floor surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.4
Gas detection system . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.6, 908.5
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.9.1
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.3
GARAGES, TRUCK AND BUS
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.6, 1607.7.3
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.10.1
GARAGES AND CARPORTS, PRIVATE . . . . . . . 406.1
Area limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.1.2
Separation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.1.4
GAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.1, 105.2, 112
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.13, 3411.8.13
Gas detection system . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.6, 415.8.7,
421.6, 908
Hydrogen cutoff room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421.6
Motor fuel dispensing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5
GATES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.2
Vehicular . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3110
GIFT SHOPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.2.4
GIRDERS
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Wood construction . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11.2.1, 2308.7
GLASS (see GLAZING)
GLASS BLOCK (see GLASS UNIT MASONRY)
GLASS UNIT MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1, 2110
Atrium enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.5
Design method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.2.5
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2110.1.1
Hazardous locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406.1.3
Material requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.6
GLAZING
Athletic facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2408
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.8, 710.5, 711.5,
715.4.3.2, 1405.13, 1715.5
Elevator hoistway and car . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2409
Fire doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.4, 715.4.7
Fire resistant walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.3.2
Fire windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.5, 715.5
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.7

Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1.1, 2406.4, 2407
Handrail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.12, 2407
Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.1, 2406.3
Impact loads . . 2406.1, 2407.1.4.2, 2408.2.1, 2408.3
Impact resistant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2
Jalousies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.5
Label/identification . . . . 715.4.6.1, 715.4.7.3, 715.5.9
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404
Louvered windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.5
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.2
Replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2401.2, 3407
Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.7.4, 2406
Secur ity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.7
Skylights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2405
Sloped . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404.2, 2405
Suppor ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.2
Swimming pools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406.4
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5, 2406.1.1, 2408.2.1
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.12
Ver tical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404.1
Wired. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5.4
GRADE, LUMBER (see LUMBER) . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1
GRADE PLANE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 502
GRAIN ELEVATORS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.5
GRANDSTANDS . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1, 1028.1.1, 3401.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2
Exit sign exemptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.7
GREENHOUSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312.1
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Deflections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1604.3
Live load. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.11.2.1
Membrane structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102.1
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.11
Sloped glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2405
Wind load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2
GRIDIRON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.2
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.2, 1015.6.1
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.6
GRINDING ROOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.2
GROSS LEASABLE AREA
(see COVERED MALL AND
OPEN MALL BUILDINGS) . . . . . . . . 402.2, 402.4.1.1
GROUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.3.1, 713.4.1.1, 2103.12
GUARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013
Assembly seating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1, 1028.14
Equipment platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5.3
Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1.1, 1303.1, 2406.4, 2407
Height. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.2
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.7
Mechanical equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.5
Opening limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.3
Parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.4
Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.10
Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.2
Roof access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.6

656

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:00 PM

12

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Screen porches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.4
Stairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1
Vehicle barr ier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.7.3
GUTTERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.4.3
GYMNASIUMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Group E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1(4)
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.1
GYPSUM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 25
Aggregate, exposed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2513
Board. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 25
Ceiling diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2508.5
Concrete, reinforced . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1914
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2508
Draftstopping. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3.1
Exterior soffit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2306.7, 2508.1
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . 718, 721.2.1.4, 721.6.2
Fire-resistant joint treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2508.4
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2503
Lath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2507, 2510
Lathing and furring for cement plaster . . . . 718, 2510
Lathing and plastering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2507
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2506
Plaster, exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2512
Plaster, interior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2511
Shear wall construction . . . . . 2306.7, 2308.9.3, 2505
Sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2304.6
Showers and water closets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2509
Stucco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2510
Veneer base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2507.2
Veneer plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2507.2
Ver tical and horizontal assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . 2504
Wallboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2506.2
Water-resistant backing board . . . . . . 2506.2, 2509. 2

H

HANDRAILS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012
Alternating tread devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.10.1
Assembly aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.13
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012.4, 1012.5, 1012.6
Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012.6
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2407
Graspability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012.3
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.2
Height. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012.2
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.7
Location . . . . . . . . . . 1012.1, 1012.7, 1012.8, 1012.9
Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.8
Stairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.12
HARDBOARD . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.3.2, 2302.1, 2303.1.6
HARDWARE (see DOORS and LOCKS AND
LATCHES)
HARDWOOD
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8.1, 2303.3
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.3.2

INDEX

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. . . . . . . . . . . 307, 414, 415
Control areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2
Explosion control . . . . . . . . . . 414.5.1, Table 414.5.1,
415.6.1.4, 415.8.5.4
Special provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.4, 415.5
Sprinklers . . . . . . . Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.2.5(2),
415.5.2, 415.6.2.4, 415.8.11, 903.2.7.1
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.3, 414.5.4, 415.6.1.4,
415.6.2.8, 415.8.2.6, 415.8.2.8.2,
415.8.4.3, 415.8.5.7, 415.8.6.3, 415.8.7,
415.8.9.3, 415.8.10, 1203.5
Weather protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.6.1
HEAD JOINT, MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
HEADROOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.2, 505.1, 1003.2,
1003.3, 1008.1.1, 1008.1.1.1,
1009.2, 1010.5.2, 1208.2
HEALTH CARE (see INSTITUTIONAL I-1
AND INSTITUTIONAL I-2)
Ambulatory health care facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422
Clinics, outpatient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
Hospitals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3
HEALTH-HAZARD MATERIALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2,
Table 414.2.5(1), 415.2, 415.4,
Table 415.8.2.1.1, 415.8.6.2
HEAT VENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 910
HEATING (see MECHANICAL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.2
Aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.4
Fire pump rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 913.3
Fireplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111
Masonry heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2112
Parking garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.8
Repair garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.5
HEIGHT, BUILDING . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503
Mixed construction types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
Modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
Roof structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504.3
HIGH PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE . . . . . . . 413,
907.2.15, 910.2.2
HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY (GROUP H) . . . . . . 307,
414, 415
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
Combustible liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.4, 307.5,
414.2.5, 414.5.4, 415.6.2
Control areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2
Conveyors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.3
Corrosives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.6, Table 414.2.5(1),
414.3, 415.7.3, Table 415.8.2.1.1
Cryogenic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 307.1,
Table 414.5.1, Table 415.8.2.1.1
Dispensing . . . . . 414.1, 414.5, 414.6, 414.7.2, 415.3
Dry cleaning (see DRY CLEANING PLANTS)
Emergency alarm systems . . . . . . . . . 414.7, 415.8.3,
415.8.4.6, 415.8.5.8, 908.1, 908.2
Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.1
Exempt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

657

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:00 PM

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Explosives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.3, Table 414.5.1,
Table 415.3.1

Factory industr ial F-1 moderate
hazard occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306.2
Factory industr ial F-2 low
hazard occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306.3
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . 414.7.2, 415.8.8,
901.6.3, 907.2.5
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.2
Flammable liquids . . . . . . . . . . . 307.4, 307.5, 415.6.2
Flammable solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.5, 415.1
Grinding rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.2
Group H-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.3, 403.1, 415.3.1,
415.3.2, 415.4
Group H-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.4, 403.1, 412.6.1,
415.3, 415.5, 415.6
Group H-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.5, 403.1, 415.3,
415.5, 415.6.2, 415.7
Group H-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.6, 415.4, 415.7
Group H-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.7, 415.8
Health-hazard mater ials . . . . 307.2, Table 414.2.5(1),
415.2, 415.4, Table 415.8.2.1.1,
415.8.6.2, 415.8.7.2
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.4, 415.5, 415.6.1.1,
415.6.1.6, 415.6.2.1.1, 503,
504, 505, 506, 508
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416.2.1, 416.3.1,
Table 803.9, 804
Irritants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 414.2.5(1),
Table 415.8.2.1.1
Liquid, highly toxic and toxic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.6,
Table 414.2.5(1),
415.7.3, 415.7.4,
Table 415.8.2.1.1, 908.3
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Location on proper ty . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.6.1.2, 415.3
Multiple hazards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.8
Organic peroxides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 414.5.1,
Table 415.3.2, 415.4.1,
415.5.1, Table 415.8.2.1.1, 418
Oxidizers, liquid and solid . . . . . . . . Table 414.2.5(1),
Table 414.5.1, 415.5.1,
Table 415.3.2,
Table 415.8.2.1.1
Pyrophor ic materials . . . . . . . . 307.4, Table 307.1(1),
Table 414.5.1, 415.4.1,
Table 415.3.2, 415.5.1,
Table 415.8.2.1.1
Sensitizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 415.8.2.1.1
Separation from other
occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.3.1, 508.2.4,
Table 508.2.5, 508.3.3, 508.4

Solids, highly toxic
and toxic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.6, Table 414.2.5(1),
415.7.3, 415.7.4,
Table 415.8.2.1.1, 908.3
Smoke and heat vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 910.2
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.5.2, 415.6.2.4,
415.8.6.3, 415.8.9, 415.8.10.1,
415.8.11, 705.8.1, 903.2.5

Standby power systems. . . . . . . . . 414.5.4, 2702.2.8,
2702.2.10 through 2702.2.13
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413, 414.1, 414.2.5,
414.5, 414.6, 414.7.1, 415.2,
415.3, Table 415.3.2, 415.4.1,
415.5, 415.6.1, 415.6.2
Tanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.2
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.8
Unstable materials . . . . . . . . 307.3, Table 414.2.5(1),
Table 414.5.1, Table 415.3.2,
415.4.1, 415.5.1,
Table 415.8.2.1.1
Water-reactive materials . . . . . . . . . . . Table 414.5.1,
Table 415.3.2, 415.5,
415.5.1, 415.5.2, 415.8,
Table 415.8.2.1.1
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403
Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.1
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6, 1007.2.1, 3007, 3008
Emergency power . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.8, 2702.2.15
Emergency systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4
Fire alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.2
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . 403.4.1, 907.2.13
Fire command station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.5
Fire depar tment communication . . . . 403.4.3, 403.4.4
Fire service elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6.1, 3007
Occupant evacuation elevators . . . . . . 403.6.2, 3008
Smoke removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.6
Smokeproof enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.4, 1022.9
Sprayed fire-resistant mater ials (SFRM) . . . . 403.2.4
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.3, 903.2.11.3
Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5
Standby power . . . . . . . 403.4.7, 2702.2.5, 2702.2.15
Structural integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.3, 1614
Super high-r ise (over 420 feet) . . . . 403.2.1, 403.2.3,
403.2.4, 403.3.1, 403.5.2
Voice alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.3, 907.2.13
Zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.6.3.2
HISTORIC BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3409
Accessible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.9
Flood provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G105.3
HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712
Continuity . . . . . . . . 508.2.5.1, 712.4, 708.11, 708.12
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . 603.1(21), 603.1(22),
603.1(25), 703, 707.3.9, 712.3
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Group I-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.3
Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.3
Incidental accessory occupancies . . . . . . . . 508.2.5.1
Insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719, 807, 808
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 714, 2508.4
Opening protection . . . . . . . 712.8, 713.4, 715, 716.6
Shaft enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.1
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.4
Atrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.3, 404.6
Covered mall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.6, 402.7.1
Fire pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 913.2.1

658

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:00 PM

14

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Flammable finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416.2
Group H-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.1.2, 415.6.2.2
Group H-3 and H-4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.7
Group H-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.2.2, 415.8.5.2
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4.3
Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.3
Hazardous mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.2
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.1, 403.3, 403.4.7.1
Hydrogen cutoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421.4
Organic coating . . . . . . . . . . . . 418.4, 418.5, 418.6
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.1, 410.5.2
HORIZONTAL EXIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1025
Accessible means of egress . . . . . . 1007.2, 1007.2.1,
1007.3, 1007.4, 1007.6, 1007.6.2
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1025.3
Exit discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1025.2
Institutional I-2 occupancy . . . . . . . . . . 407.4, 1025.1
Institutional I-3 occupancy . . . . . . . . . . 408.2, 1025.1
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREAS)
HORIZONTAL FIRE SEPARATION
(see HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY)
HOSE CONNECTIONS
(see STANDPIPES, REQUIRED)
HOSPITAL
(see INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I-2) . . . . . . 308.3, 407
HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS
(see WIND LOADS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.2
HURRICANE SHELTER (see STORM SHELTER)
HURRICANE SHUTTERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2
HYDROGEN CUTOFF ROOMS . . . . 421, Table 508.2.5

I

IDENTIFICATION, REQUIREMENTS FOR
Fire barr iers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Fire par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Fire wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2403.1, 2406.3
Inspection cer tificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1702.1
Labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1703.5
Preservative-treated wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8.1
Smoke barr ier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Smoke par tition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2203.1
IMPACT LOAD . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1603.1.1, 1607.8
INCIDENTAL USE AREAS
(see ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES)
INCINERATOR ROOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.3
INDUSTRIAL (see FACTORY OCCUPANCY)
INSPECTIONS . . . . . . . . 110, 1704, 1705, 1706, 1707
Alternative methods and materials . . . . . . . . 1704.15
Approval required. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.6
Atrium buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.3
Concrete construction . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.1, 110.3.2,
110.3.9, 1704.4
Concrete slab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.2
Continuous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1702.1

INDEX

EIFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1704.14
Energy efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.7
Fabricators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.2
Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Final . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.10
Fire-resistant mater ials . . . 110.3.9, 1704.12, 1704.13
Fire-resistant penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6
Footing or foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.1, 110.3.9,
1704.4, 1704.5, 1704.8,
1704.9, 1704.10, 1704.11
Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.4
Lath or gypsum board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.5, 2503
Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.8
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1704.5, 1704.11
Periodic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1702.1
Preliminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.2
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3
Right of entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.6
Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1707
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.16, 1704.16
Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1704.7
Special
(see STRUCTURAL TESTS AND
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9,
1704, 1706, 1707
Sprayed fire-resistant mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.12
Sprinklers, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 904.4
Steel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.4, 110.3.9, 1704.3
Third par ty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.4
Welding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1704.3, 2204.1
Wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1706
Wood, structural. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.9, 1704.6
INSTITUTIONAL I-1 [see INSTITUTIONAL
OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.2
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1106.7.2, 1107.5.1
Combustible decorations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.1
Emergency escape and rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.6.1,
907.2.11.2, 907.5.2.3.2
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . . 420, 508.2.4,
Table 508.2.5, 508.3.3
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.6, 903.3.2
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Visible alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.3
INSTITUTIONAL I-2 [see INSTITUTIONAL
OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)] . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3, 407
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1106.4, 1106.7.2,
1107.5.2, 1107.5.3,
1107.5.4, E106.4.6
Combustible decorations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.1
Corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.2, 407.3, 1018.2
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.6
Exterior exit stair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1026.2
Fire alarm and detection . . . . 407.6, 407.7, 907.2.6.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.6
Hyperbar ic facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.9
Occupancy category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1604.5
Smoke barr iers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4
Smoke compar tment . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.2.1, 407.2.3,
407.4, 407.5

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

659

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:01 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Smoke par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.3
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.5, 903.2.6, 903.3.2
Suites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.2.2 through 1014.2.7
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4, 1014.2.3.3,
1014.2.4.3, 1014.2.4.4,
1014.2.6, 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Yards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.8
INSTITUTIONAL I-3 [see INSTITUTIONAL
OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)] . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.4, 408
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1103.2.14, 1107.5.5,
1108.4.2, 3411.8.7, E104.3,
E104.4, E106.4.8
Combustible decorations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.1
Exit sign exemption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.1
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . 408.10, 907.2.6.3
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.4, 1008.1.9.9
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.2, 408.3, 408.4
Occupancy category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1604.5
Secur ity glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.7
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.5, 408.8
Smoke barr ier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.6
Smoke compar tment . . . . . . . . 408.4.1, 408.6, 408.9
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.6
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.6.1, 408.8.1,
1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
INSTITUTIONAL I-4 [see INSTITUTIONAL
OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)] . . . . . . . . . 308.3.1, 308.5
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1103.2.12
Corr idor rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.1
Fire alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.6
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.6
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I) . . . . . . 308
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Adult care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.5.1
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Child care. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3.1, 308.5.2, 310.1
Group I-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.2
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3, 407
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.4, 408
Group I-4 day care facilities . . . 308.3.1, 308.5, 310.1
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . 420, 508.2.4,
Table 508.2.5, 508.3.3

INSULATION
Concealed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.2
Duct insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.1
Exposed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.3
Fiberboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.1, 1508.1.1,
2303.1.5.2, 2303.1.5.3
Foam plastic (see FOAM PLASTICS) . . . . . . . . 719.1
Loose fill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.4, 719.6
Pipe insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.1, 719.7
Reflective plastic core . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2613
Roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.5, 1508

Sound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719, 807, 1207
Thermal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719, 807, 1508
INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT
Lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
Sound transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1207
Space dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1208
Temperature control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1204
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . 409.3, 414.3, 415.8.2.6, 1203.4
Yards or cour ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1206.2, 1206.3
INTERIOR FINISHES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 8
Acoustical ceiling systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 807, 808
Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.10, 804.4
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.8
Decorative materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801.1.2, 806
Floor finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804, 805
Foam plastic insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.3, 2603.4
Foam plastic trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.3, 2604.2
Insulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 807
Light-transmitting plastics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.16, 2611
Trim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 806.5, 806.6
Wall and ceiling finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803
Wet location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1210, 2903
INTERPRETATION, CODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.1

J

JAILS (see INSTITUTIONAL I-3) . . . . . . . . . 308.3, 408
JOINT
Concrete construction joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906.4
Gypsum board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2508.4
Lumber sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10.8.1
Shotcrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1913.7
Structural plain concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1909.3
Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.3.3
JOINTS, FIRE-RESISTANT SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . 714

K

KIOSKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11
KITCHENS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 508.4(d)
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.4
Dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1208
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.2
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1004.1.1
Rooms openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1210.5

L

LABORATORIES
Classification of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304.1
Hazardous mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414, 415
Incidental accessory occupancies . . . . Table 508.2.5
LADDERS
Boiler, incinerator and furnace rooms . . . . . . . 1015.3
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.4.2, 1012.2,
1012.6, 1013.2, 1013.3
Emergency escape window wells . . . . . . . . . 1029.5.2

660

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:01 PM

16

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.3.5, 1009.11
Helipor t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7.3, 1021.1.3
Refrigeration machinery room . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.4
Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.3, 1015.6.1
LAMINATED TIMBER,
STRUCTURAL GLUED . . . . . . . . . . . . 602.4, 2303.1,
2304.11.3, 2306.1,
2308.8.2.1, 2308.10.7

LANDINGS
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.6
Ramp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.6
Stair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.5
LATH, METAL OR WIRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2507.2
LAUNDRIES . . . . . . . . . . . . 304.1, 306.2, Table 508.2.5
LAUNDRY CHUTE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.13, 903.2.11.2
LEGAL
Federal and state authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102.2
Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.8
Notice of violation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114.2, 116.3
Registered design professional . . . . . . 107.1, 107.3.4
Right of entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.6
Unsafe buildings or systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Violation penalties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114.4
LIBRARIES
Classification, other than school . . . . . . . . . . . . 303.1
Classification, school . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
LIGHT, REQUIRED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205
Ar tificial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205.3
Emergency (see EMERGENCY LIGHTING)
Natural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205.2
Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205.4
Yards and cour ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1206
LIGHTS, PLASTIC CEILING DIFFUSERS . . . . . 2606.7
LINTEL
Adobe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.3.4.7
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.11
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.1.5
Masonry, wood suppor t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.12
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.6.3
LIVE LOADS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1607
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . 107.2, 1603.1.1
Posting of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106.1
LIVE/WORK UNITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1, 419
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.1
LOAD AND RESISTANCE
FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1
Load combinations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605.2
Wood design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2301.2, 2307
LOAD COMBINATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605
Allowable stress design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605.3
Load and resistance factor design . . . . . . . . . . 1605.2
Strength design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605.2
LOADS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106, 1602.1
Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1605
Dead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1606
Flood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.7, 1612

INDEX

Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1607.8
Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.6, 1603.1.1, 1607
Rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1611
Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.5, 1613
Snow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.3, 1608
Soil lateral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1610
Wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1603.1.4, 1609
LOBBIES
Assembly occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.4
Elevator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14.1, 1007.2.1,
1007.4, 3007.4, 3008.11
Exit discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
LOCKS AND LATCHES . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9, 1008.1.10
Access-controlled egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.4
Delayed egress locks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.7
Electromagnetically locked . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.8
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.6
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.4, 1008.1.9.9
Group R-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.5.1
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.3
LUMBER
General provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 23
Quality standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303

M

MAINTENANCE
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.2
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3310.2
MALL (see COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL
BUILDINGS)
MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.4.2
MANUFACTURED HOMES
Flood resistant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G501
MARQUEES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3106, H113
Drainage, water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3201.4
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.11
MASONRY
Adhered veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.10
Adobe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.3
Anchorage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.2
Anchored veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6
Ashlar stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) . . 2102.1, 2103.3
Calculated fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.4
Chimneys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2113
Cold weather construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.3
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104, 2109.2.2
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.3
Corbelled . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.2
Dampproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2.2
Design, methods . . . . . . . 2101.2, 2107 through 2109
Fire resistance, calculated . . . . . . . . 721.3.2, 721.3.4
Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.3.1, 2111
Floor anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.2
Foundation walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.5
Foundations, adobe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2109.3.4.3
Glass unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.2.5, 2103.6, 2110
Grouted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

661

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:02 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Headers (see BONDING, MASONRY) . . . . . . 2109.2
Heaters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2112
Hot weather construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.4
Inspection, special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.5
Joint reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.13
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713
Quality assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2105
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
Roof anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.1
Rubble stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Seismic provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2106
Serviceability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.3.4
Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.4, 2109.2
Suppor t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.12
Surface bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.9
Test procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2105.2.2.2, 2105.3
Tie, wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.1.3
Veneer . . . . . . 1405.6, 1405.10, 2101.2.6, 2308.11.2
Wall, composite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Wall, hollow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Wall anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.2
Waterproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.3.2
Wythe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
MATERIALS
Alternates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.11
Aluminum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 20
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 19
Glass and glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 24
Gypsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 25
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 21
Noncombustible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.4
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 26
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 22
Testing (see TESTING). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 23
MEANS OF EGRESS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 10
Accessible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007, 2702.2.5,
2702.2.6, 3411.6, 3411.8.10
Aircraft related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3.3, 412.5.2
Alternating tread device . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7.3, 505.5,
1009.10, 1015.3, 1015.4
Ambulatory care facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422.4
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 1028
Atrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.9, 707.3.5
Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1005.1
Child care facilities (see Day care facilities)
Ceiling height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.2
Construction drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.3
Covered mall and open mall buildings . . . . . . . 402.4,
402.5, 402.13
Day care facilities . . . . . 308.5, 310.1, Table 1004.1.1,
Table 1015.1(a), Table 1021.2(e)
Doors . . . . . . . 1005.2, 1008, 1015, 1020.2, 2702.2.7
Dur ing construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303.3, 3310
Elevation change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.5
Elevators . . . . . 403.5.2, 403.6.2, 1003.7, 1007, 3008
Emergency escape and rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029
Equipment platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5
Escalators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.7

Existing buildings . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 3310, 3404.6,
3406.1, 3411.6, 3412.5, 3412.6.11
Exit (see EXIT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1020 through 1026
Exit access
(see EXIT ACCESS) . . . . . . . . . 1014 through 1019
Exit discharge (see EXIT DISCHARGE) . . . . . . 1027
Exit enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.1
Exit signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011, 2702.2.3, 2702.2.9
Fire escapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3406
Floor surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804, 1003.4
Gates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.2
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.2, 408.3, 408.4, 408.6
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013
Handrails . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1012
Hazardous mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.6.1.2,
415.8.4.4, 415.8.5.5
Headroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.2, 1003.3
Helistops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.7.3, 1021.1.3
High hazard Group H . . . . . . . . . 415.8.4.4, 415.8.5.5
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5, 403.6
Illumination . . . . . . . . . . . . 1006, 2702.2.4, 3412.6.15
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.9, 804
Ladders (see LADDERS)
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Live/work units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.3
Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . 505.3, 505.4, 1004.6, 1007.1
Moving walk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.7
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . 1004.1, 1004.1.1, 1004.2
Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.8
Protruding objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.3, 1005.2
Ramps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010, 1026
Scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.3, 105.2.2, 108.2, 1001.1
Seating, fixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.1, 1028
Special amusement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.7
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.3, 410.5.3, 1015.6
Stairways . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5, 1009, 1022.1, 1026
Temporary structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103.4
Travel distance
(see TRAVEL DISTANCE) . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016
Turnstile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.3
Underground buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.5.1, 405.7
Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1005.1, Table 1005.1, 1009.1,
1010.5.1, 1018.2, 1028.6, 1028.8
MECHANICAL (see AIR CONDITIONING, HEATING,
REFRIGERATION, AND VENTILATION) . . . . 101.4.2
Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.13, 1009.14, 1209.3
Air transfer openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.10, 706.11,
707.9, 708.2(7), 708.10, 709.9,
710.8, 711.7, 712.7, 713.1.1, 713.4.1.3, 716
Chimneys (see CHIMNEYS)
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 28
Disconnected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303.6
Ducts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.8, 705.10, 706.11,
707.9, 708.2(4), 708.2(15),
708.10, 709.9, 710.8, 711.7,
712.7, 713.1.1, 713.4.1.3, 716
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . . 3202.3.2
Equipment on roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1509, 1510.2
Equipment platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5

662

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:02 PM

18

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Factory-built fireplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111.14.1
Fireplaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2111
Motion picture projection room . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3
Permit required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.1, 105.2
Roof access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.13
Room separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5
Seismic inspection and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . 1707.7,
1707.8, 1708.4
Smoke control systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.2, Chapter 28
MECHANICALLY LAMINATED DECKING . . . 2304.8.3
MEMBRANE ROOF COVERINGS . . . . . . . . . 1507.11,
1507.12, 1507.13
MEMBRANE STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . 2702.2.9, 3102
MENTAL HOSPITALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.3
MERCANTILE OCCUPANCY (GROUP M)
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017.2, 1017.3
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.7
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Parking beneath or above . . . . . . . . . . . 509.2, 509.7,
509.8, 509.9
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Special occupancy separation . . 309.1, Table 508.2.5
Sprinkler system, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.7
Travel distance . . . . . . 402.4, 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.3, 507.4, 507.12
METAL
Aluminum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 20
Roof coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.3.2, 1507.5
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 22
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.5
MEZZANINES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . 1104.4, 1108.2.4, 1108.2.9
Area limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.2, 505.5.1
Egress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.3, 505.4, 1004.6, 1007.1
Equipment platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.5.3, 1013.1
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.1, 1003.2
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.6
Stairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2(9), 1009.10, 1022.1
MIRRORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1, 2406.1, 2406.4.1(7)
MIXED OCCUPANCY (see OCCUPANCY
SEPARATION)
MOISTURE PROTECTION . . . . . . . . . . . 1210, 1403.2,
1503, 2303.2.4, 2304.11
MONASTERIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
MORTAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Ceramic tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.5
Dampproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805.2.2
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.3.1, 713.4.1.1
Glass unit masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2110.1.1
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.8, 2103.9
Rodentproofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F

INDEX

MOTELS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
MOTION PICTURE PROJECTION ROOMS . . . . . . 409
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.2
Exhaust air . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3.2, 409.3.3
Lighting control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.4
Projection room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3
Supply air . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3.1
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3
MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING SYSTEM . . . . . . . . 406.5
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.13, 3411.8.13
MOTOR VEHICLE FACILITIES . . . . . . . . 304, 311, 406
MOVING, BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3410, D103.3
MOVING WALKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3005.2
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.7

N

NAILING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2303.6, 2304.9
NONCOMBUSTIBLE BUILDING MATERIAL . . . 703.4
NURSING HOMES
(see INSTITUTIONAL, GROUP I-2) . . . . . 308.3, 407

O

OCCUPANCY
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.2
Cer tificates (see CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY)
Change (see CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY)
Floor loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 4
OCCUPANCY CATEGORY
(Seismic Design) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1604.5
Multiple occupancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.5.1
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
Covered mall and open mall buildings . . . . . . . . . 402
HPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8
Mixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.3
Mixed occupancy values. . . . . . . . . . . 508, 3412.6.16
Special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 4
OCCUPANCY SEPARATION
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Aircraft related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.4, 412.5.1
Covered mall and open mall building. . . . . . . . . 402.7
Incidental accessory occupancies . . 508.2.5, 707.3.6
Mixed occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508, 509, 707.3.8
Parking garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.1.4, 406.2.7,
Table 508.3.3(c)
Repair garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.2
Required fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . Table 508.4, 509
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.1, 410.5.2
OCCUPANT EVACUATION ELEVATORS . . . . 403.5.2,
403.6.2, 3008

OCCUPANT LOAD
Actual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.1.1
Cer tificate of occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Covered mall and open mall building . . . . . . . 402.4.1
Determination of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.1, 1004.1.1

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

663

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:02 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Increased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.2
Outdoors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.8
Seating, fixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.7
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.3
OFFICE BUILDINGS
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.5
OPEN MALL BUILDINGS (see COVERED MALL
AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
OPENING PROTECTION, EXTERIOR WALLS . . 705.8
OPENING PROTECTION, FLOORS
(see VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION)
OPENING PROTECTIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.8, 706.8,
707.6, 708.7, 709.6,
710.5, 712.8, 715
Automatic closing devices . . . . . . . . 715.4.8, 909.5.2
Fire door and shutter assemblies . . . . . . . . . 705.8.2,
712.8, 715.4
Fire windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Glass unit masonry
(see GLASS UNIT MASONRY) . . . . . . . . . 2110.1.1
Self-closing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.7
ORGANIC COATINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418
ORGANIC PEROXIDES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.4, 307.5
OXIDIZERS, LIQUID AND SOLID . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.2

P

PANIC HARDWARE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.10
PARAPET, EXTERIOR WALL . . . 705.11, 2109.3.4.1.4
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.11.1
Fire wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.6
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.11.1
PARKING, ACCESSIBLE . . . . . . . . . . . . 1106, 1110.1,
3411.4, 3411.7
PARKING GARAGES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . 1105.1.1, 1106.1, 1110.1
Barriers, vehicle . . . . . . . . . 406.2.4, 1602.1, 1607.7.3
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311, 406.2.1
Construction type . . . . 406.3.3, Table 503, Table 601
Enclosed
(see PARKING GARAGE, ENCLOSED) . . . . 406.4
Gates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3110
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.3, 2407.1.3
Height, clear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.2
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.9.1.3
Occupancy separation . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.7, 508, 509
Open (see PARKING GARAGE, OPEN) . . . . . . 406.3
Special provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.10
Underground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405
PARKING GARAGES, ENCLOSED . . . . . . . . . . . 406.4
Area and height [see STORAGE
OCCUPANCY (GROUP S)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.4.1
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . 1003.2, 1010.1, 1021.1.2
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.4.2

PARKING GARAGES, OPEN . . . . . . . . . . 403.1, 406.3
Area and height [see STORAGE
OCCUPANCY (GROUP S)] . . . . . . 406.3.5, 406.3.6
Construction type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.3
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . 406.3.8, 1003.2, 1007.3,
1007.4, 1010.1, 1016.1, 1018.1,
1021.1.2, 1022.1, 1024.1, 1027.1
Occupancy separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.4
Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.9
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.12

PARTICLEBOARD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1
Draftstopping. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3.1
Moisture protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1403.2, 1405.2
Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.7
Shear walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.5
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5
Wall bracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.3
PARTITIONS
Fire (see FIRE PARTITION)
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.5, 1607.13
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . 602.4.6, 603.1(10), 603.1(25)
Occupancy, specific . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.1
Smoke (see SMOKE PARTITION)
Toilets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2903
PARTY WALLS
(see FIRE WALLS) . . . . . . . . . . 706.1.1, Table 715.5
PASSAGEWAY, EXIT (see EXIT) . . . . . . . . . . . . 1023.1
PASSENGER STATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
PATIO COVERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.10, Appendix I
PEDESTRIAN
Protection at construction site . . . . . . . . 3303.2, 3306
Walkways and tunnels . . . . . . . . . . . . 3104, 3202.3.4
PENALTIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114.4
PENETRATION-FIRESTOP SYSTEM
Fire-rated walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.3.2
Fire-rated horizontal assemblies . . . . . . . . . 713.4.1.2
PENETRATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713, 716
Fire-resistant assemblies
Exterior wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.10
Fire barr ier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.7, 707.9
Fire par tition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 709.7, 709.9
Fire wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 706.9, 706.11
Hor izontal assemblies . . . . . . . 712.5, 712.7, 713.4
Shaft enclosures . . . . . 708.1, 708.2, 708.8, 708.10
Smoke barr iers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.6, 710.8, 713.5
Smoke par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.6, 711.7
Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.3
Nonfire-resistant assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.4.2
PERLITE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 720.1(1), Table 2507.2
PERMITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Application for . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.2, 105.1, 105.3
Drawings and specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.1
Expiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.5
Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Liability for issuing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.8
Placement of permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.7

664

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:03 PM

20

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Plan review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.2, 107.3
Suspension or revocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.6
Time limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.3.2, 105.5
PIER FOUNDATIONS
(see FOUNDATION, SHALLOW)
PILE FOUNDATIONS (see FOUNDATION, DEEP)
PIPES
Embedded in concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1906.3
Embedded in fire protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.8
Insulation covering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719.1, 719.7
Penetration protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713, 1022.4
Under platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4
PLAIN CONCRETE (see CONCRETE). . . . . . . . . 1909
PLAN REVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.3
PLASTER
Fire-resistance requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 718
Gypsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 718.1, 718.2
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.5
Por tland cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 718.5,
Table 2507.2, Table 2511.1.1
PLASTIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 26
Approval for use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.2
Core insulation, reflective plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . 2613
Fiber reinforced polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2612
Fiberglass-reinforced polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2612
Finish and trim, interior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2604
Light-transmitting panels . . . . . . . . . . . . 2401.1, 2607
Roof panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2609
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.16, 2611,
D102.2.10, H107.1.1
Thermal barrier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1404.8, 2605, D102.2.11
Walls, exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.4, 2603.5
PLASTIC, FOAM
Insulation (see FOAM PLASTICS) . . . . . . . . . . . 2603
Interior finish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803.4, 2603.9
Malls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.11, 402.12.1, 402.16.5
Stages and platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.6
PLASTIC, LIGHT-TRANSMITTING
Awnings and patio covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.10
Bathroom accessor ies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.9
Exterior wall panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2607
Fiber reinforced polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2612.5
Fiberglass-reinforced polymer . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2612.5
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2608
Greenhouses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.11
Light-diffusing systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.7
Roof panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2609
Signs, interior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2611
Skylight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2610
Solar collectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.12
Structural requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2606.5
Unprotected openings . . . . . . . . . . . . 2608.1, 2608.2
Veneer, exterior . . . . . . . . 603.1(14), 603.1(16), 2605
Wall panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2607
PLATFORM (see STAGES AND PLATFORMS) . . . 410
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4
Temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4.1

INDEX

PLATFORM LIFTS, WHEELCHAIR
Accessible means of egress . . . . . . . 1007.2, 1007.5,
1009.1, 2702.2.6
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.7, 3411.8.3
PLUMBING (see TOILET AND
TOILET ROOMS) . . . . . . 101.4.3, 105.2, Chapter 29
Aircraft hangars, residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.5.4
Facilities, minimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902, 3305.1
Fixtures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2902.1
Room requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1210, 2406.2,
2406.4, 2606.9, 2903

PLYWOOD
(see WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS) . . . . . . 2302.1
Preservative-treated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8.1
PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE . . . . . . . . . . . 720
PRESERVATIVE-TREATED WOOD . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1
Fastenings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9.5
Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1403.5, 2304.11
Shakes, roof covering . . . . . . . . . . 1507.9.6, 1507.9.8
PROJECTION ROOMS
Motion picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409
PROJECTIONS, COMBUSTIBLE . . . . 705.2.3, 1406.3
PROPERTY LINE (see FIRE SEPARATION
DISTANCE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.4.4
PROSCENIUM
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.5
Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.4
PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM (see EMERGENCY
COMMUNICATIONS)
Covered mall and open mall building . . . . . . . 402.15,
907.2.20, 2702.2.14
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.6
PUBLIC PROPERTY . . . . . . . . Chapter 32, Chapter 33
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Encroachments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 32
PYROPHORIC MATERIALS . . . . Table 307.1(1), 307.4

R

RAILING (see GUARDS AND HANDRAILS)
RAMPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010
Assembly occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.11
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.2 through 1010.5.3,
1010.7, 1010.9
Existing buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.8.5
Exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1026, 3201.4
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.10, 1013, 1607.7
Handrails. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.8, 1012, 1607.7
Landings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.6
Parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.5
Slope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1010.2, 3411.8.5
REFERENCED STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 35
Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102.3, 102.4
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2
List. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 35
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 35

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

665

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:03 PM

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

REFORMATORIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.4
REFRIGERATION (see MECHANICAL) . . . . . . 101.4.2
Machinery room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.4
REFUGE AREAS
(see HORIZONTAL EXIT, SMOKE
COMPARTMENTS, STORM SHELTERS) . . . 407.4.1,
408.4.1, 408.6,
422.3, 423.1.1, 1025.4
REFUSE CHUTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.13
REINFORCED CONCRETE (see CONCRETE)
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1901.2
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4
REINFORCEMENT
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1907, 1913.4, 1915.4
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2103.13
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACES OF
Balcony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.5, 1108.2.4
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303, 305.1
Door operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.9.3
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028
Fire alarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.1
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Special occupancy separation . . 303.1, Table 508.2.5
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.6, 507.7
REPAIRS, BUILDING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3405
Compliance alternatives . . . 3412.1, 3412.2.4, 3412.3
Flood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1612.1, 1612.2, 3405.5
Minor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.2.2
Permit required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.2, 1613.3, 3401.1,
3401.3, 3409.1, 3411.2
RESIDENTIAL CARE/ASSISTED
LIVING FACILITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308.1
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1107.5.1, 1107.5.2,
1107.6.4, 3411.8.7, 3411.8.9
Fire alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.6, 907.5.2.3.3
Separations . . . . . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5, Table 508.4
Smoke alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11.2
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.6, 903.3.2
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP R) . . . . . . . 310
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1106.2, 1107.6,
3411.8.7, 3411.8.8,
3411.8.9, E104.2, E104.3
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2, G801.1
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1018.1, 1018.2
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.1
Draftstopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3.2, 717.4.2
Emergency escape and rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.1
Exit sign exemptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.1
Fire alarm and detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.8,
907.2.9, 907.2.10
Group R-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
Group R-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
Group R-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
Group R-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1, 1008.1.9.5.1
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1

Parking, private . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.1
Parking beneath or above . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509
Par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420, 709.1
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Smoke alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11
Special occupancy separation . . . 419, 420, 508.2.4,
Table 508.2.5, 508.3.3
Special provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 509.5, 509.6
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.8, 903.3.2
Swimming pools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109.4
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Visible alarms . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.5.2.3.3, 907.5.2.3.4
RETAINING WALLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.2, 2304.11.7
Flood provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G801.4
Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.5.12
REVIEWING STANDS (see BLEACHERS AND
GRANDSTANDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.1.1
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
RISERS, STAIR (see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
Alternating tread device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.10.2
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.5.1, 1028.6,
1028.7, 1028.9, 1028.11
Closed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.4.5
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.4
Spiral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.9
Uniformity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.4.4
RODENTPROOFING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix F
ROLL ROOFING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.6
ROOF ACCESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.13, 1009.14
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
Cooling towers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1509.4
Drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.4, 3201.4
Fire classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1505
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.9
Height modifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504.3
Impact resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.7
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1506
Parapet walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.3, 1503.6
Penthouses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1509.2
Tanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1509.3
Towers, spires, domes and cupolas. . . . . . . . . 1509.5
Weather protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503
Wind resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.1, 1609.5
ROOF CONSTRUCTION
Construction walkways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306.7
Coverings (see ROOF COVERINGS) . . . . . 1609.5.2
Deck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.5.1
Draftstopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.4
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601
Fireblocking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.11
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Penetration of fire resistant assemblies . . . . . . . . 713
Protection from adjacent construction . . . . . . . 3307.1
Rain loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1611
Roof structures . . . . . . . . . . . . 504.3, 1509, D102.2.9
Signs, roof mounted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H110
Slope, minimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 15
Snow load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1608

666

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:03 PM

22

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Trusses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.3, 2303.4, 2308.10.10
Wood (see ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD . . . . 602.4.3, 602.4.5
Anchorage to walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.8.2
Attic access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1209.2
Ceiling joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10.2
Diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305.1, 2306.2
Fastening schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Fire-retardant-treated . . . . . . . . Table 601, 603.1(25)
Framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.10.3, 2308.10
Rafters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1.1
Sheathing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7, 2308.10.8
Trusses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.4, 2308.10.10
Ventilation, attic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.2
Wind uplift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10.1
ROOF COVERINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507
Asphalt shingles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.2
Built up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.10
Clay tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.3
Concrete tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.3
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.2.4
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 603.1(3), 1505
Flashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.2, 1503.6, 1507.2.9,
1507.3.9, 1507.5.7, 1507.7.7,
1507.8.8, 1507.9.9, 1510.6
Impact resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.7
Insulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1508
Liquid applied coating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.15
Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102
Metal panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.4
Metal shingles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.5
Modified bitumen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.11
Plastics, light-transmitting panels . . . . . . . . . . . . 2609
Replacement/recovering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1510.3
Reroofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1510
Roll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.6
Single-ply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.12
Slate shingles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.7
Sprayed polyurethane foam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.14
Thermoplastic single-ply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.13
Wind loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.1, 1609.5
Wood shakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.9
Wood shingles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.8
ROOF DRAINAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.4
ROOF REPLACEMENT/RECOVERING. . . . . . . 1510.3
ROOF STRUCTURE (see ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES)
ROOM DIMENSIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1208
ROOMING HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310

S

SAFEGUARDS DURING
CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 33
Adjoining proper ty protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3307
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3302
Demolition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3303
Evacuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1804.1
Fire extinguishers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3309

INDEX

Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3310
Protection of pedestrians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306
Sanitary facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3305
Site work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3304
Sprinkler system, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3312
Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3308.1.1, 3311
Temporary use of streets, alleys
and public proper ty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3308
SAFETY GLAZING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.7.4, 2406
SCHOOLS (see EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY)
SEATING, FIXED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1108.2, 1109.10
Aisles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1017.4, 1028.9
Bleachers (see BLEACHERS)
Grandstands (see GRANDSTANDS)
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.7
Temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
SECURITY GLAZING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.7
SECURITY GRILLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.5
SEISMIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . 107, 1603.1.5,
1603.1.9, 1709
Existing building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3403.4.1, 3404.4.1,
3404.5, 3405.2, 3408.4
Fire-resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.12
Geotechnical investigation . . . . 1803.5.11, 1803.5.12
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2106
Membrane structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102.7
Seismic design category . . . . . . . . . 1613.2, 1613.5.6
Seismic detailing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.10
Site class . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.2, 1613.5.2, 1613.5.5
Site classification for seismic design . . . . . . 1613.5.5
Site coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.2, 1613.5.3
Statement of special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . 1705.3
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2205
Structural observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1707, 1710
Structural testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305, 2308.11, 2308.12
SERVICE STATION
(see MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES)
SHAFT (see SHAFT ENCLOSURE
AND VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION) . . . . 702
SHAFT ENCLOSURE (see VERTICAL
OPENING PROTECTION) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.5, 708.11, 708.12
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14
Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2, 1016.1, 1022.1
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.6
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.3.1, 708.4
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.5
High-r ise buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.2.1.2, 403.2.3,
403.3.1.1, 403.5.1
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.9, 714
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.3
Opening protection . . . . . 708.8, 708.10, 713, 716.5.3
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.8

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

667

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:04 PM

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Refuse and laundry chutes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.13
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2
SHEAR WALL
Gypsum board and plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2505
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Wood . . . . . . 2302.1, 2305.1, 2306.3 through 2306.7
SHEATHING
Clearance from ear th . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11.2.2
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Fiberboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.6
Floor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7, 2308.8.6
Gypsum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.2.4
Moisture protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11.2.2
Par ticleboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.5
Roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7
Roof sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10.8
Wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.6.1, 2308.9.3
Wood structural panels . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.4, 2211.3
SHOPPING CENTERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
SHOTCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1913
SHUTTERS, FIRE
(see OPENING PROTECTIVES) . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4
SIDEWALKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.2(6), G801.4
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
SIGNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3107, Appendix H
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011.3, 1110,
E106.4.9, E107, E109.2.2
Accessible means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.8.2,
1007.9 through 1007.11
Animated devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H108
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H105, H107
Covered mall and open mall building. . . . . . . . 402.16
Doors . . . . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.4, 1008.1.9.3, 1008.1.9.7
Electrical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H106
Elevators . . . . . . . 1109.6, 1110.2, 3002.3, 3008.11.5
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . . 3202.3.1
Exit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1011, 2702.2.3, 2702.2.9
Floor loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106.1
Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H109
Height limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H109.1, H112.4
Illumination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H106.1
Luminous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.5, 1011.4, 1024
Marquee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H113
Obstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.3.2, 1003.3.3, H103
Occupant load, assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.3
Parking spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1110.1
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2611, D102.2.10
Por table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H114
Projecting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H112
Protruding objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003.3
Roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H110
Stair identification . . . 1022.7, 1022.8, 1110.2, 1110.3
Standpipe control valve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.7.1
Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6, H111
SITE DRAWINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107.2.5
SITE WORK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3304
SKYLIGHTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2405, 3106.3
Light, required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205.2

Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2610
Protection from adjacent construction . . . . . . . 3307.1
SLAB, COMPOSITE
STEEL DECK/CONCRETE . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2209.2.1
SLAB ON GROUND, CONCRETE . . 1910, 2304.11.2.3
SLATE SHINGLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1507.7
SLEEPING UNITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1102, 1103.2.11,
1105.1.6, 1106.2, 1106.7.2, 1107
Accessibility, existing . . . . . . . . . . . 3411.1, 3411.8.7,
3411.8.8, 3411.8.9
Group I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
Group R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310
Scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101.2
Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 420.2, 420.3
SMOKE ALARMS
Live/work unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11.2
Multiple-station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11
Residential aircraft hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.5.3,
412.5.4, 907.2.21
Residential occupancies . . . . . 907.2.11.1, 907.2.11.2
Single-station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 907.2.11
SMOKE BARRIERS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710
Ambulatory care facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422.2
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4.3, 710.4, 909.5
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.5, 715.4.3, 909.5.2
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703, 710.3
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Hor izontal assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.9
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.7, 714
Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.2
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . 710.5, 713.3, 713.5,
715, 716.5.5, 909.5.2
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 710.6, 713
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.5
Special provisions
Ambulatory care facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 422
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.4
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.6, 408.7
Underground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4.2, 405.4.3
SMOKE COMPARTMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . 407, 408, 422
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREA)
SMOKE CONTROL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909
Amusement buildings, special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.1
Atrium buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.5
Covered mall and open mall building. . . . . . . . 402.10
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.9
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.6, 403.5.4, 1022.9
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.16
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7.2
Standby power systems . . . . . . 909.20.6.2, 2702.2.2
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.5
Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412.6.10.1
SMOKE DAMPERS . . . . . . . . . . . . 716.2 through 716.5

668

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:04 PM

24

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM (see FIRE ALARM
AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS) . . . . . . . . 907
SMOKE DETECTORS
Covered mall and open mall . . . . 402.4.5.1, 907.2.20
High-r ise buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.1, 907.2.13
HPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.9.3
Institutional I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.7
Smoke activated doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.8.3
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.5
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . 907.2.18, 907.2.19
SMOKE-DEVELOPEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 802,
803.1.1, Table 803.9

SMOKE EXHAUST SYSTEMS
Underground buildings . . . . . . 405.5, 907.2.18, 909.2
SMOKE PARTITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711
Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.4
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.5
Ducts and air transfer openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.7
Fire-resistance rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.3
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110.3.6
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.6
Marking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.2
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.5, 716.5.7
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 711.6
Special provisions
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.6
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.3
SMOKE REMOVAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.6
SMOKE VENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7.1, 910
SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURES . . . . . 403.5.4, 1022.9
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.20
SNOW LOAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1608
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2404
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
(see FOUNDATION) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 18
Depth of footings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1809.4
Excavation, grading and fill . . . 1804, 3304, J106, J107
Expansive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.5.3, 1808.6
Flood hazard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808.4
Footings and foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1808
Footings on or adjacent to slopes . . 1808.7, 3304.1.3
Foundation walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.5, 3304.1.4
Geotechnical investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803
Grading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1804.3, Appendix J
Loadbear ing values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1806
Soil boring and sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803.4
Soil lateral load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1610
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.7
SORORITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310.1
SOUND-INSULATING MATERIALS
(see INSULATION) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719
SOUND TRANSMISSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1207
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 31
Automatic vehicular gates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3110
Awnings and canopies (see AWNINGS and
CANOPIES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3105
Marquees (see MARQUEE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3106

INDEX

Membrane structures (see MEMBRANE
STRUCTURES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3102
Pedestr ian walkways and tunnels (see WALKWAYS
and TUNNELED WALKWAYS) . . . . . . . . . . . . 3104
Signs (see SIGNS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3107
Swimming pools enclosures and safety devices
(see SWIMMING POOL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109
Telecommunication and broadcast towers
(see TOWERS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3108
Temporary structures
(see TEMPORARY STRUCTURES) . . . . . . . . 3103
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS (see INSPECTIONS and
STRUCTURAL TESTS AND SPECIAL
INSPECTIONS)
SPIRAL STAIRS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.9
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.1, 1009.2, 1009.9
Exceptions . . . 1009.4.2, 1009.4.3, 1009.4.5, 1009.12
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.3.4
Live/work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.3.3
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.3, 1015.6.1
SPRAY-APPLIED FIRE RESISTANT
MATERIALS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1702.1
Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.12, 1704.13
Steel column calculated fire resistance . . . . 721.5.2.2
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS, AUTOMATIC . . . . . 903, 3312
Exempt locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.3.1.1.1
Fire depar tment location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 912
Seismic design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1613.6.3
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 914.2
Substitute for fire rating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601(4)
Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412.6.17
SPRINKLERS, REQUIRED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903
Aircraft related . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.4.6, 412.6.5
Ambulatory health care facilities . . . . . 422.5, 903.2.2
Amusement buildings, special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.4
Area increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506.3
Assembly . . . . . . . . . 903.2.1, 903.2.11.5, 1028.6.2.3
Atrium building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.3
Basements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.11.1
Combustible storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.12
Covered mall and open mall building. . . . . . . . . 402.9
Drying rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 417.4
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.3
Exempt locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.3.1.1.1
Factory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.4
Fire areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 707.3.9
Garages . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.10, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.10.1
Hazardous mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 414.2.5(1),
Table 414.2.5(2), 903.2.11.4
Hazardous occupancies . . . . . . . . 415.5.2, 415.6.2.4,
415.8.6.3, 415.8.11,
705.8.1, 903.2.5
Height increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504.2
High-r ise buildings . . . . . . . . 403.2, 403.3, 903.2.11.3
Incidental accessory occupancies . . . . Table 508.2.5
Institutional. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.5, 903.2.6, 903.3.2
Laundry chutes, refuse chutes, termination
rooms and incinerator rooms . . . 708.13, 903.2.11.2

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

669

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:05 PM

25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

Live/work units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.5, 903.2.8
Mercantile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.7
Mezzanines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505.4, 505.5.2
Multistory buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.11.3
Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.8, 903.3.2
Special amusement buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.4
Spray finishing booth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 416.5
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.6
Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.9, 903.2.10
Supervision
(see SPRINKLERS, SUPERVISION) . . . . . . . 903.4
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . 405.3, 903.2.11.1
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507
SPRINKLERS, SUPERVISION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.4
Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 901.6
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.3
STAGES AND PLATFORMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303, 410
Dressing rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5
Egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.3, 1015.6
Fire barr ier wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.1, 410.5.2
Floor finish and floor covering . . . . . . . . 410.3, 410.4,
804.4, 805.1
Hor izontal assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.5.1, 410.5.2
Platform, temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4.1
Platform construction . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.4, 603.1(11)
Proscenium cur tain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.5
Proscenium wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.4
Roof vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7.1
Scenery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.6
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7.2
Sprinkler system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.6
Stage construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3, 603.1(11)
Standpipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.7, 905.3.4
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7
STAIRWAY (see ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICES,
SPIRAL STAIRS, STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION and
STAIRWAY ENCLOSURE)
STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION
Aisle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.9
Alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3404.1
Alternating tread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.10
Circular (see Curved)
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.6
Curved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.3, 1009.8
Discharge barr ier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.7
Dur ing construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3310.1
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.14, 1022.3, 3002.7
Enclosure under . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.6.3
Existing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3404.1, 3408.3
Exterior exitway. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1026.1, 1027.1
Fireblocking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2.4
Guards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013.1, 1013.2, 1607.7
Handrails. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.12, 1012, 1607.7
Headroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.2
Illumination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1006.1, 1205.4, 1205.5
Ladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.11
Landings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.5, 1009.7
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1, 1607.7
Luminous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5.5, 411.7.1, 1024

Roof access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.13, 1009.14
Seismic anchorage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.12.7
Spiral (see SPIRAL STAIRS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.3.4,
410.5.3, 419.3.3, 1009.9
Treads and r isers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.3, 1009.4
Width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.1
Winders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.3, 1009.4.2,
1009.4.3, 1009.4.4, 1009.8
STAIRWAY ENCLOSURE . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2, 1022.1
Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.1.9.2
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.4
Discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
Doors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.4.8, 1008.1.9.10
Elevators within . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.3, 3002.7
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.2, 707.4, 708.6,
709.5, 1022, 1026.6
Fire-resistant construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.1
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.3.8
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.5
Penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.4
Pressur ization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.6, 909.20.5
Space below, use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1009.6.3
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.5
STANDARDS (see REFERENCED STANDARDS)
STANDBY POWER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2702.1, 2702.3
Aircraft traffic control towers . . . . . 412.3.5, 2702.2.18
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.7, 2702.2.2
Covered mall and open mall building . . . . . . . 402.14,
2702.2.14
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.4, 2702.2.5, 2702.2.19,
3003.1, 3007.7, 3008.15
Hazardous occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.5.4, 421.8,
2702.2.10, 2702.2.12
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.4.7, 2702.2.15
Hor izontal sliding doors . . . . . . . 1008.1.4.3, 2702.2.7
Membrane structures . . . . . . . . . . 2702.2.9, 3102.8.2
Platform lifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.5, 2702.2.6
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.11, 2702.2.2
Smokeproof enclosure . . . . . . . 909.20.6.2, 2702.2.20
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . 405.8, 2702.2.16
STANDPIPE AND HOSE SYSTEMS (see
STANDPIPES, REQUIRED) . . . . . . . . . . 905, 3106.4,
3308.1.1, 3311
Cabinet locks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.7.2
Dry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.8
Hose connection location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.1,
905.4 through 905.6, 912

STANDPIPES, REQUIRED
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.3.2, 905.5.1
Covered mall and open mall buildings . . . . . . 402.9.1,
905.3.3
Dur ing construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.10
Elevators, fire service access . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3007.5
Helistops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.3.6
Marinas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 905.3.7
Parking garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.6, 406.3.9
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.7, 905.3.4
Underground buildings . . . . . . . . . . . 405.10, 905.3.5

670

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:05 PM

26

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

STATE LAW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102.2
STEEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 22
Bolting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2204.2
Cable structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2207
Calculated fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.5
Cold-formed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2202.1, 2209, 2210
Conditions of restraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2.3
Decks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2209.2
Identification and protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2203
Joists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2202.1, 2206
Open web joist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2206
Parapet walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503.3, 1503.6
Reinforcement, concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1907
Seismic provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2205
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.3
Storage racks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2208
Welding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2204.1
STONE VENEER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.7
Slab-type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.8
STOP WORK ORDERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
STORAGE OCCUPANCY (GROUP S) . . . . . . . . . . 311
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.5, 406.3.6,
406.4.1, 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Automobile parking garage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406
Hazard storage, low, Group S-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 311.3
Hazard storage, moderate, Group S-1 . . . . . . . 311.2
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.5, 406.4.1, 503,
504, 505, 506, 508, 509
High-piled combustible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413
Interior finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 803.9, 804
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Parking garages . . . . . . . . 406.1, 406.2, 406.3, 406.4
Plumbing fixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902
Smoke and heat vents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 910.2
Special occupancy separation . . 309.1, Table 508.2.5
Sprinkler system, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.10
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2
Unlimited area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507.2, 507.3, 507.4
STORM SHELTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREA)
STRENGTH
Design requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.2
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Nominal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1
Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1
STRENGTH DESIGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1602.1, 1604.1
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2101.2.2, 2108
STRUCTURAL DESIGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 16
Aluminum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 20
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 19
Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 18
Masonry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 21
Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 22
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 23
STRUCTURAL TESTS AND
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS
(see INSPECTIONS AND TESTING) . . . . . . 110.3.9,
Chapter 17

INDEX

Alternative test procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1712
Approvals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1703
Contractor responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1709
Design strengths of mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1711
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1701
In-situ load tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1714
Material and test standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716
Preconstruction load tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715
Special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704, 1706, 1707
Statement of special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . 1705
Structural observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1710
Structural testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708
Test safe load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1713
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION . . . . . . . 1702.1, 1710
STUCCO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2512
SWIMMING POOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109
Flood provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G801.5
Gates, access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109.4.1.7
Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406.4
Indoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109.4.2
Public . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109.3
Residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3109.4

T

TELEPHONE EXCHANGES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
TELESCOPIC SEATING (see FOLDING AND
TELESCOPIC SEATING)
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103
Cer tificate of occupancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.3
Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.2
Construction documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103.2
Encroachment, public right-of-ways . . . . . . . . 3202.3
Flood provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G901
Means of egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3103.4
Permit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.1, 3103.1.1
Power, temporary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.3
Termination of approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108.4
TENANT SEPARATION
Covered mall buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.7, 709.1
TENTS
Standby and emergency power . . . . . . . . . . 2702.2.9
TERMITES, PROTECTION FROM . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11
TERRA COTTA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.9
TESTING
Building official required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104.11.1
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.6
Fire-resistant mater ials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 703.2
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2406, 2408.2.1
Roof tile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1716.2
Seismic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708
Smoke control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.3
Soils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1803
Sprinklers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 904.4
Structural (see STRUCTURAL TESTS AND
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS)

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

671

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:05 PM

27

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

THEATERS [see ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY
(GROUP A, PROJECTION ROOMS and
STAGES AND PLATFORMS)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
THERMAL BARRIER,
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION . . . . 2603.4, 2603.5.2
THERMAL-INSULATING MATERIALS
(see INSULATION) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 719
TILE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Ceramic (see CERAMIC TILE)
Fire resistance, clay or shale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 720.1
TOILETS and TOILET ROOMS . . . . . Chapter 29, 3305
Accessible . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.2, 1607.7.2
Construction/materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1210, 2903
Family- or assisted-use . . 1109.2.1, 2902.1.2, 2902.2
Fixture count . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 2902.1
Grab bar live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1607.7.2
Location . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902.3.2, 2902.3.3, 2902.3.4
Par titions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2903
Public facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2902.3
Rooms openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1210.5
Signs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1110.1, 1110.2
Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.4.3
TORNADO SHELTER (see STORM SHELTER)
TOWERS
Airpor t traffic control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.3
Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1509.4
Location and access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3108.2
Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3108
Television . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3108
TOXIC MATERIALS [see HIGH-HAZARD
OCCUPANCY (GROUP H)]
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307.6, 414, 415
Gas detection system . . . . . . . . 415.8.7, 421.6, 908.3
TRAVEL DISTANCE
Area of refuge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1007.6
Assembly seating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1028.7
Atrium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.9
Balcony, exterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.2
Common path of travel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3
Mall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 402.4.2, 402.4.4
Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1016.1
Refrigeration machinery/
refrigerated rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1015.4, 1015.5
Smoke compar tments (Group I-2 and I-3) . . . . 407.4,
408.6.1, 408.8.1
Special amusement building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411.4
Stories with one exit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1021.2
Suites (Group I-2) . . . . . . . . . 1014.2.3.3, 1014.2.4.3,
1014.2.4.4, 1014.2.6
TREADS, STAIR (see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
Concentrated live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
TREATED WOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1
Fire-retardant treated wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2
Pressure-treated wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8
Stress adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1.3
TRUSSES
Cold-formed steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2210.3
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.5

Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Metal-plate-connected wood . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.4.6
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.4
TUNNELED WALKWAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3104, 3202.1
TURNSTILES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1008.3

U

UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405
Compar tmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4
Construction type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.2
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4.3
Emergency power loads . . . . . . . . 405.10, 2702.2.16
Exits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.8
Fire alarm systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.6
Smoke barr ier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.4.2, 405.4.3
Smoke exhaust/control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.5
Smokeproof enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.7.2, 1022.9
Sprinkler system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.3
Standby power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.8, 2702.2.16
Standpipe system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405.11, 905.3.5
UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 507
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
(see STRUCTURES, UNSAFE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Appeals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113, Appendix B
Restoration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115.5
Revocation of permit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105.6
Stop work orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Utilities disconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112.3
UNSTABLE MATERIALS . . . . 307.3, Table 414.2.5(1),
Table 414.5.1, Table 415.3.2,
415.5.1, 415.8
UNUSABLE SPACE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 712.3.3
USE AND OCCUPANCY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 3
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2
Incidental accessory occupancy . . . . . . . . . . 508.2.5,
Table 508.2.5
Mixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.3. 508.4
UTILITIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Service connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112.1
Service disconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112.3
Temporary connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112.2
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS
OCCUPANCY (GROUP U) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1103.2.5, 1104.3.1
Accessory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 508.2, G801.1
Agricultural buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Appendix C
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Egress illumination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1006.1
Flood provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G1001
Height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 503, 504, 505, 506, 508, 509
Live loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Special occupancy separation . . . . . . . Table 508.2.5
Sprinkler system, automatic . . . . . . . . . . . . . 903.2.11
Travel distance . . . . . . . . . . . . 1014.3, 1016.1, 1021.2

672

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:06 PM

28

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

V

VALUATION OR VALUE (see FEES, PERMIT) . . 109.3
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.2.4,
1602.1, 1607.7.3
VEHICLE SHOW ROOMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
VEHICULAR FUELING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5.2
VEHICULAR GATES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3110
VENEER
Cement plaster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.15
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.17
Fiber cement siding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.16
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.12
Masonry, adhered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.10
Masonry, anchored . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.6
Metal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.11
Plastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2605
Slab-type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.8
Stone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.7
Terra cotta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.9
Vinyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.14
Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5
VENTILATION (see MECHANICAL) . . . . . . . . . 101.4.2
Attic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.2
Aircraft hangars, residential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.5.4
Aircraft paint hangars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 412.6.6
Bathrooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.4.2.1
Crawl space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.3
Elevator hoistways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3004
Exhaust, hazardous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.5
Exhaust, HPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.10
Exit enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.5
Fabrication areas, HPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.2.6
Hazardous . . . . . . . . . . . . . 414.3, 414.5.4, 415.6.1.4,
415.6.2.8, 415.8.2.8.2, 415.8.5.7,
415.8.6.3, 415.8.7, 415.8.9.3
High-r ise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1022.9
HPM service corr idors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415.8.4.3
Live/work unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 419.8
Mechanical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.1
Natural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.4
Parking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.12, 406.4.2
Projection rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 409.3
Repair garages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.6.3
Roof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.2, 1503.5
Smokeproof enclosures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 909.20.3,
909.20.4, 909.20.6
Spray rooms and spaces . . . . . . . . . . . 416.2.1, 416.3
Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 410.3.7
Under-floor ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1203.3
VENTS, PENETRATION PROTECTION . . . . . . . . . 713
VERMICULITE, FIRE RESISTANT . . . . . . . . . . . . . 720
VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION
Atriums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404.6
Duct penetrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 716.1
Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.14
Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708.2, 1022.1
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.5
High-r ise . . . . . 403.2.1.2, 403.2.3, 403.3.1.1, 403.5.1

INDEX

Shaft enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 708, 1016.1, 1022.1
Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3412.6.6.1
VESTIBULES, EXIT DISCHARGE . . . . . . . . . . . 1027.1
VINYL
Expanded . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 802, 803.7, 803.8
Rigid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.14
VIOLATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
VOICE ALARM (see ALARMS, VOICE)

W

WALKWAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3104
Dur ing construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3306
Encroachment, public right-of-way . . . . . . . . 3202.3.4
Fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 601
Live load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Table 1607.1
Materials per construction type . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715, 716
WALL, EXTERIOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705
Bearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Coverings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405
Exterior Insulation and
Finish Systems (EIFS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1408
Exterior structural members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 704.10
Fire district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D102.1, D102.2.6
Fire-resistance ratings . . . . . . Table 602, 703, 705.5,
706.5.1, 707.4, 1403.4
Flashing, veneered walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.4
Foam plastic insulation . . . . . . . . . 2603.4.1.4, 2603.5
Glazing, rated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715.5
Joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.9, 714
Light-transmitting plastic panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2607
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.4, 1406
Metal Composite Materials (MCM) . . . . . . . . . . . 1407
Nonbear ing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 6
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . 705.8, 705.10, 716.5.6
Parapets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.11
Projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.2
Structural stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.6
Veneer (see VENEER)
Weather resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1403.2, 1405.2,
1407.6, 1408.4
Weather resistant barr iers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.2
WALL, FIRE (see FIRE WALLS)
WALL, FOUNDATION (see FOUNDATION)
WALL, INTERIOR
Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803, 1210.2, 1210.3
Opening protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715, 716
WALL, INTERIOR NONBEARING (see PARTITIONS)
WALL, MASONRY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2102.1
Wood contact . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11.2.3, 2304.11.2.5
WALL, PARAPET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705.11, 1503.3,
1503.6, 2109.3.4.1.4
WALL, PARTY (see FIRE WALLS)
WALL, PENETRATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 713.3
WALL, RETAINING (see RETAINING WALL)
WALL, VENEERED (see VENEER) . . . . . . Chapter 14

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

673

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:06 PM

29

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

INDEX

WALL, WOOD CONSTRUCTION
Bracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.3
Cutting, notching, boring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.10
Exterior framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9
Fastening schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.3, 2308.9
Interior bear ing par tition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.1
Interior nonbear ing par tition . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.2.3
Openings . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.5, 2308.9.6, 2308.9.7
Shear walls . . . . . . . . 2305.1, 2306.3 through 2306.7
Sheathing (see SHEATHING)
Studs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.1
Top plates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.2.1
WATER-REACTIVE MATERIALS . . . . . . Table 307.1(1)
WEATHER, COLD
Concrete construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.12
Masonry construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.3
WEATHER, HOT
Concrete construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1905.13
Masonry construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2104.4
WEATHER PROTECTION
Exterior walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.2
Roofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1503
WELDING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2204.1
Materials, verification of
steel reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1704.4.1
Special inspections . . . . . . . 1704.3.1, 1707.2, 1707.4
Splices of reinforcement in masonry . . . . . . . . 2107.4
Structural testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1708.2, 1708.3
WIND LOAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609
Alternate all-heights method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.6
Basic wind speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.3
Construction documents . . . . . . . 107, 1603.1.4, 1709
Exposure category . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.4
Glass block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2110
Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2, 2404
Hurr icane-prone regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.2
Provisions for walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.2
Roofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1504.1, 1609.5, 2308.10.1
Seismic detailing required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1604.10
Special inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1706
Statement of special inspections . . . . . . . . . . . 1705.4
Wind-borne debris region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.2
Wind tunnel testing . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.1.2, 1716.2.2
WINDERS, STAIR (see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
WINDOW
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1109.13.1
Emergency egress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029
Exterior, structural testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1715.5
Fire (see OPENING PROTECTIVES) . . . . . . 715.4.9,
715.4.10
Glass (see GLAZING) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.13
Required light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205.2
Wells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1029.5
WIRES, PENETRATION PROTECTION . . . . . . . . . 713
WOOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 23
Allowable stress design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306
Bracing, walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.3

Calculated fire resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 721.6
Ceiling framing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.10
Connections and fasteners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Contacting concrete, masonry or ear th . . . 2304.11.4
Decay, protection against. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11
Diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305.1, 2305.2, 2306.2
Draftstopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.3, 717.4
End-jointed lumber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.1
Fiberboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.5, 2306.6
Fire-retardant treated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2
Fireblocking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 717.2
Floor and roof framing
(see FLOOR CONSTRUCTION, WOOD) . . 2304.4
Floor sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7
Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1807.1.4, 2308.3.3.1
Grade, lumber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.1
Hardboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.6
Heavy timber construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.10
Hurr icane shutters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1609.1.2
I-joist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.2
Inspection, special . . . . . . . . . 1704.6, 1706.2, 1707.3
Lateral force-resisting systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305
Light-frame construction, conventional . . . . . . . . 2308
Load and resistance factor design . . . . . . . . . . . 2307
Moisture content . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.8.2, 2303.2.6
Nails and staples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.6
Par ticleboard shear walls. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.5
Plywood, hardwood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.3
Preservative treated . . . . . . 1403.5, 1403.6, 2303.1.8
Roof framing
(see ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD) . . . 2304.4
Roof sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7
Seismic provisions . . . 2305, 2306, 2308.11, 2308.12
Shear walls . . . . . . . . . . 2305, 2306.3 through 2306.7
Standards and quality, minimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303
Structural panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2303.1.4
Suppor ting concrete or masonry . . . . . . . . . . 2304.12
Termite, protection against . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.11
Trusses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.4
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chapter 14
Wall framing
(see WALL, WOOD CONSTRUCTION) . . . . 2304.3
Wall sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.6
WOOD SHINGLES AND SHAKES . . . . 1507.8, 1507.9
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS
(see WOOD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2302.1, 2303.1.4
Bracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2308.9.3
Decorative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.3
Design requirements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2301
Diaphragms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2305.1, 2306.2
Fastening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.9
Fire-retardant-treated. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.2
Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2303.1.4
Roof sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.7, 2308.10.8
Seismic shear panels . . . . . . . . . . 2305.1, 2308.12.4
Shear walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.3
Sheathing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304.6.1
Standards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2306.1
Subfloors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 804.4
Veneer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1405.5

674

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:06 PM

30

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

Y

YARDS OR COURTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1206
Group I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407.8
Group I-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 408.3.6, 408.6
Light, natural . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1205
Motor fuel-dispensing facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.5.3
Occupant load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1004.8
Parking garage, open . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 406.3.6

INDEX

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

675

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:06 PM

31

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite  Default screen

676

2009 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING  CODE®

47_index_ibc_2009.prn
M:\data\CODES €9 I-Codes\Building\Final VP_Chgo '_index_ibc_2009.vp
Tuesday, February 24, 2009 3:01:06 PM

32

