How Buildings Work

This page intentionally left blank 

How Buildings Work

THE NATURAL ORDER
OF ARCHITECTURE
Third Edition

EDWARD ALLEN

Drawings by David Swoboda and Edward Allen

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

2OO5

OXJORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that fu r ther
Oxford University's objective of excellence
in research, scholarship, and education.

Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto

With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam

Copyright © 1980,1995, 2005 by Oxford University Press, Inc.

Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com

Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Allen, Edward.
How buildings work : the natural order of architecture / Edward Allen. — 3 rd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Cover title: Na tural order of architecture.
ISBN-13: 978-0-19-516198-4
ISBN-io: o-i9-5i6i98-X
i. Bu i ld ings—Env i ronmen tal engineering.
I. Title: Natural order of architecture. 
II. Title.

TH6o2i.A44 2004
721—dc22 

2004021414

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 21
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

With thanks to the people
who helped make it happen:

JOYCE BERRY
NOEL CARR
ALBERT G. H. DIETZ
ELLEN R. FUCHS
N. J. HABRAKEN
CATHERINE HUMPHR IES
FRANK JONES
DONLYN LYNDON
DOUGLAS MAHONE
JAMES RAIMES
ELDA ROTOR
J. N. TARN
CYBELE TOM
WACLAW ZALEWSKI

and especially

MARY M. ALLEN

This page intentionally left blank 

Prexace

to the Tnird Edition

Over the past quarter century, the practice of bu i ld ing has under-
gone significant changes in several areas, notably mechanical, elec-
trical, and communications systems. Researchers have added to our
knowledge of building function. New areas of social concern have
emerged, especially for buildings that are accessible by all, and for
bu i ld ing in a sustainable manner. This third edition, in the tradition
of its predecessors, sticks to the basics, but includes hundreds of
changes both large and small that reflect the current state of the art
and science of building. I have retained the basic organization of the
original volume, along with its look and feel, all of which have worn
well. The mission and premise of the book remain unchanged.

South Natick, Massachusetts
January 2005

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents

Prologue: Sustainable Building, x

WHAT BUILDINGS DO

1. The Outdoor Environment, 3
2. The Human Environment, 15
3. The Concept of Shelter, 23

HOW BUILDINGS WORK

4. Building Function, 31
5. Providing Water, 33
6. Recycling Wastes, 41
7. Providing for Thermal Comfort, 49
8. Thermal Properties of Building Components, 53
9. Controlling the Radiation of Heat, 72
10. Controlling Air Temperature and Humidity, 81
11. Controlling Air Movement, 99
12. Keeping Water Out, 109
13. Seeing and Illumination, 128
14. Hearing and Being Heard, 138
15. Providing Concentrated Energy, 149
16. Fitting Buildings to People, 158
17. Providing Structural Support, 172
18. Providing for Building Movement, 204
19. Controlling Fire, 213
20. Getting a Building Built, 227
21. Keeping a Building Alive and Growing, 239
22. Bu i ld ing Components and Building Function, 252

Glossary, 257
Index, 267

Prologfue: Sustainable
Buildingf

Buildings represent a huge investment, not only of money and time,
but also of the world's resources. In constructing and occupying
buildings, we consume vast quantities of materials and generate a
ma jor portion of the world's environmental pollution. According to
the Worldwatch Institute, buildings consume more than 40 percent
of the energy utilized in the world each year and, in so doing, release
into the atmosphere one-third of the carbon dioxide and two-fifths
of the compounds that cause acid rain. In the United States, our
bu i ld ings use about one-sixth of the fresh water consumed each year
and a quarter of harvested wood. Our buildings release about half
of the fluorocarbons that escape into the upper atmosphere and
destroy the ozone layer that shelters us from the sun's ultraviolet
rays. About 40 percent of our landf i ll material comes from construc-
tion projects. We see in these statistics that bu i ld ings are responsible
for many forms of environmental degradation. They place a heavy
burden on the earth's resources, most of which are nonrenewable
and finite, and they jeopardize the health and welfare of human i ty.
Thus it is increasingly urgent that we learn to build and operate
bu i ld ings in a sustainable manner.
Sustainability may be defined as meeting the needs of the current
generation without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their needs. When we burn fossil fuels, we consume a portion
of a finite, nonrenewable resource so that it will not be available a
generation or two in the future. We also generate greenhouse gases
that promote global warming. This will confront a near-future gen-
eration with the problem of a world in which glaciers and ice caps
are shrinking, seas are rising to perilous levels, and weather is violent
and unpredictable. When we build sprawling residential subdivisions
on fertile land once used for growing food crops, we reduce the

stock of agricultural land that will be available to future generations.
When we use wood from forests that are not replanted with trees, we
make it more likely that our children and grandchildren will find
wood to be a scarce, expensive commodity.
We have it in our power to change this situation. We can reduce
substantially the energy needed by our buildings. We can meet
much of this need with solar and wind energy, both of which are
renewable, nonpolluting, and available on the site itself. In many
instances, we can build on land that has been recovered from
abusive practices of the past such as contaminated industrial sites,
demolished tenement apartment buildings, and land on which
poor agricultural practices have led to extensive soil erosion. We can
build with wood from certified forests, ones that are harvested and
replanted in such a way that they will produce wood forever. We can
build with wood recovered from old buildings that have been taken
down. In each of these examples, we are building in such a way as to
pass on to future generations the means to build in a similar fashion.
A number of organizations and manufacturers are working dili-
gently toward sustainable construction practices (also referred to as
"green" building). Some relate to particular resources such as forests.
Some have to do with recycling materials such as scraps of gypsum
wallboard or worn-out tires into new building materials: gypsum wall-
board, roofing slates. Some are promoting renewable energy sources
such as solar, wind, and photovoltaic technologies. Some concentrate
on improving the energy performance of buildings through better
thermal insulation, more airtight construction, and more efficient
heating and cooling machinery. And some focus on educating
architects and engineers, the designers of buildings, who by siting
and orienting buildings intelligently, configuring them appropriately,
selecting materials knowingly, and detailing the construction prop-
erly, can greatly reduce their impact on the earth and its resources.
Several organizations are working to educate architects and
engineers in how to build sustainably. Prominent among these is the
United States Green Building Council, which sponsors the LEED
system for evaluating the sustainability of a building. LEED stands for
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. The evaluation
process is summarized by a checklist that is used in evaluating the
degree of sustainability that is attained in a building. It is instructive
to look at the categories on this checklist. The first broad category,
"Sustainable Sites," includes, among other factors

• whether a building will improve its site or degrade it;
• whether the users of the building will be able to come and go
by foot, on bicycles, or by public transportation so as to save
fuel and reduce air pollution;

XI

• the extent to which the site is disturbed by the new construc-
tion; and
• how storm water is managed (is it stored for use on-site, used to
recharge the aquifer in the area, or dumped into a storm
sewer?).

The second category, "Water Efficiency," includes

• use of stored storm water or "gray" wastewater (discarded wash
water that does not contain human wastes) for irrigation;
• innovative wastewater treatment; and
• use of fixtures that reduce water consumption.

Category 3, "Energy & Atmosphere," relates to

• efficiency of the building's heating and cooling devices and
systems;
• use of renewable energy resources on the site; and
• the potential of the building to contribute to ozone depletion.

Category 4 is "Materials & Resources." It includes

• recycling of building materials and building wastes;
• waste management on the construction site;
• recycled content in bu i ld ing materials used;
• use of local and regional materials, which consume less fuel in
transportation, rather than materials that must be transported
long distances;
• rapidly renewable materials; and
• wood from certified forests.

"Indoor Environmental Quality," the title of the fifth category,
covers

• indoor air quality;
• elimination of tobacco smoke;
• ventilation effectiveness;
• air quality during construction;
• use of materials that do not give off toxic gases;
• control of chemicals used in the building;
• thermal comfort; and
• use of daylighting.

The sixth and last category is titled "Innovation & Design Process."
It is an open category that awards credits for original design ideas

XII

that lead to more sustainable buildings. It also awards credits if an
architect or engineer who has been accredited as a LEED expert is
involved in the design of the project.
Although this list is still evolving, it is already serving as the
basis for certifying the degree to which a building is sustainable.
Additionally, it is a powerful vehicle for raising the environmental
awareness of architects, engineers, and builders.
Throughout the pages that follow, you will find information
relating to sustainability in the design, construction, and operation
of buildings. Every chapter tells how to build in such a way that
resources are used wisely, energy is conserved, waste products are
reduced, and buildings are made comfortable, durable, and healthy
with the m in imum possible cost to the environment. Many of these
practices are old and well-known. Some are new and innovative. In
either case, architects and engineers must become familiar with
them and use them more consistently if we are to pass on to our chil-
dren and grandchildren a world as lovely, hospitable, healthy, and
resource-rich as the world into which we were born.

X l ll

This page intentionally left blank 

Wkat Buildings Do

This page intentionally left blank 

1

The Outdoor
Environment

The Earth and the Sun

Earth is unique among the planets of our solar system in offering all
the basic necessities of life. But human life is far from easy on most
parts of the globe. A planet-sized atmospheric engine, fueled by radi-
ation from the sun and cooled by the radiation of heat back into the
emptiness of space, moves air, moisture, and thermal energy across
its surface in restless patterns that create an outdoor environment of
varied and often extreme conditions.
The sun is the single most important factor in the lives of people
and their buildings. The oxygen we breathe, the food we eat, and
the fuels we bu rn are created by the action of sunlight on green
plants. The water we drink is pur if ied in an atmospheric distillation
process powered by heat from the sun. Sunlight warms our bodies
and buildings by direct radiation or through warming the air around
us, sometimes enhancing our comfort and other times making us
uncomfortable. Sunlight illuminates the outdoors, disinfects the
surfaces it touches, creates vitamin D in our skin, and has an uplifting
effect on our dispositions. Sunlight also disintegrates the materials
with which we build, bu rns our skin, and promotes skin cancer. The
sun is both the giver of life and its destroyer.
Sunlight includes electromagnetic radiation of varying wave-
lengths. Fewer than i percent of the sun's rays that reach sea level on
earth are too short in wavelength to be visible. These ultraviolet rays
range between about 160 and 400 nanometers (nm) in wavelength.
The visible solar wavelengths, ranging between 400 and 780 nm,
contain about half the energy of sunlight. The other half of the
energy lies in the infrared part of the spectrum, the invisible wave-
lengths between 780 and 1500 nm. (A nanometer is one-billionth of
a meter. A dime is about one million nanometers thick.)

3

1 .1

1 .2

1 .3

The earth loops around the sun in a slightly elliptical orbit with
a mean rad ius of 92.9 m i l l ion miles (149.5 m i l l ion kilometers). It
rotates about its own axis once each day and completes an orbit
every 365 V4 days. The half of the globe that is oriented away from
the sun at any moment is in darkness, and the other half is sunlit
(1.1). The earth's orbit is out of round by about 3 percent. Thus the
distance between the earth and the sun changes enough to cause
a variation of about 7 percent in the intensity of solar radiation on
the earth over a six-month period. However, this variation is not the
creator of the earth's seasons. In fact, the earth is closest to the sun
in winter, so the orbital eccentricity helps slightly to moderate the
seasons. The seasons are created, instead, by the tilt of 2-$°2j'
between the axis of the earth's rotation and a pe rpend icu lar to the
plane of its orbit (1.2).

The Summer Solstice

At the position in the earth's orbit where the North Pole is tilted
closest to the sun, the sun's rays in the Northern Hemisphere pass
through the atmosphere and strike the earth's surface at a steep
angle (1.3). The path of the rays through the atmosphere is short,
so that the air absorbs and scatters relatively little sunlight before
the radiation reaches the ground. Because the sun is so high with
respect to the surface of the land in the northern hemisphere, solar
radiation is received in a maximum concentration per unit area of
soil. The sun's rays are at their hottest at this orbital position, known
as the summer solstice, which occurs about June 21 of each year. The
total solar heat gathered by the Northern Hemisphere on June 21 is
fu r ther increased by ano ther important factor: the sun is seen for a
longer period of time on this day than on any other day of the year.
The sun rises to the north of east before six o'clock in the morning
and sets to the north of west af ter six o'clock in the evening. How
long before and after six o'clock sunrise and sunset occur is wholly
dependent on latitude. On the equator, the day from sunrise to sun-
set is always 12 hours long regardless of the time of year. Moving
northward to the Tropic of Cancer, June 21 is only slightly longer
than 12 hours, and the sun at noon appears directly overhead at
an altitude of exactly 90°. (The Tropic of Cancer is at 2^°2j' north
latitude, the same angle as the inclination of the earth's axis.) As we
move far ther and far ther to the north, we find that June 21 has longer
and longer hours of sunlight, with the sun rising and setting fa r ther
and fa r ther toward the north, until at the Arctic Circle the sun never
sets at all but merely skims the horizon at midnight, giving 24 hours
of sunlight. Simultaneously, however, the noontime sun's altitude
decreases as one moves northward, from 90° at the Tropic of Cancer,

4

to 70° at the latitude of New York City, to 47° at the Arctic Circle,
and to 23°27' at the North Pole. This reduces the heating effect of
the sun on the earth's surface so that, in general, the farther north
one goes, the cooler the climate will be.
Not surprisingly, the summer solstice occurs during the warm
season of the year. On the average, however, the hottest weather of
the year comes four to six weeks later than the summer solstice, in
late July and early August. This delay occurs because the land and
water absorb and hold considerable solar heat during the warmer
days of the year. By late in the summer, however, the earth gives
back this stored energy to the cooler air, thus moderating the effect
of the lower solar flux in that season.
In the opposite orbital position, which occurs about December
21, the winter solstice in the Northern Hemisphere, the North Pole is
tilted directly away from the sun. The sun's rays arrive at a low angle
to the surface of the earth after losing much of their energy in a long,
flat passage through the atmosphere, and their heating effect on the
ground is correspondingly weak. This day has the fewest hours of
sunlight of any day of the year, with the sun rising late and to the
south of east, climbing to a low noontime, and setting early and to
the south of west. Above the Arctic Circle, the sun never rises at all
but appears as a fa int glow in the southern sky at midday. The land
and seas are still giving off stored heat from the warmer autumn
days, however, so that the coldest part of the winter does not come
until late January or early February.

The Equinoxes

On or about March 21 and September 21, known respectively as the
vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox, the North and South
Poles are equidistant from the sun. Everywhere on earth, the sun
rises exactly in the east and sets exactly in the west 12 hours later,
except at the extreme poles, where the sun travels just along the
horizon for 24 hours.

The Annual Cycle

It is useful to keep in mind that the seasonal variations in length of
day and the max imum daily sun altitude are least pronounced in the
tropics and most exaggerated in the polar regions. In the tropics, the
length of day is always close to 12 hours but, except on the equator
itself, is slightly longer in summer and slightly shorter in winter. The
sun always rises in the vicinity of due east, a bit to the north in sum-
mer and a bit to the south in winter, and sets in the vicinity of due
west, traveling very nearly directly overhead at noon. The sun always

5

intercepts the horizon in the mornings and evenings at a steep
angle, producing very brief sunrises and sunsets (1.4).
As one moves northward in latitude, seasonal variations increase
gradually. Summer days are longer than they are in the tropics,
and winter days are shorter. Noontime sun altitudes are lower,
giving a lower solar flux per u n it of ground area. The directions
of sunrise and sunset show a more marked seasonal swing, and
sunrises and sunsets are more prolonged (1.5). In the Northern
Hemisphere the limiting case is the North Pole, where day and
night each are six months long: the sun rises on March 21, climbs to
a low "noon" on June 21, and sets on September 21 (1.6). Over the
course of a year, every point on the globe is exposed to direct sun-
light exactly half the time. At the poles, the half portion of sunlight
comes in one continuous six-month period. At the equator, each day
of the year is evenly divided between sunlight and darkness. At inter-
mediate latitudes, longer days in summer compensate for shorter
ones in winter.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the sun resides in the northern half
of the sky, and the seasons are reversed from those in the Northern
Hemisphere, with longer days and higher solar fluxes occurring
while the days are short and the sunlight is weak in the Northern
Hemisphere. The progression of seasonal effects from the equator to
the pole is the same as for the Nor thern Hemisphere.

Effects of Solar Radiation on the Earth

A number of factors affect the amount of solar radiation that reaches
a particular surface. As we have already seen, these include the
length of day, the angle of incidence of sunlight on the ground at
each time of day, and the amount of atmosphere traversed by the
radiation at each time of day. Of these three, atmospheric inter-
ference is the most d iff icu lt factor to evaluate. Solar intensity just
outside the earth 's atmosphere is about 130 watts per square foot
(1,400 watts/m2). At an altitude of about 15 miles, a stratum of ozone
and nascent oxygen absorbs most of the ultraviolet portion of the
solar waves. In the lower reaches of the atmosphere, carbon dioxide,
water vapor, clouds, dust, and pollutants work in various ways to
reflect, scatter, absorb, and reradiate d i f f e r ent parts of the spectrum.
The shorter wavelengths of sunlight, wh ich are the most affected,
produce the blue appearance of the daytime sky. A considerable
portion of the sunlight's energy is stripped away by the "clear"
a tmosphere—near ly half, on the average, worldwide. Most of this
energy is then reradiated from the atmosphere into space, but a
significant amount is reradiated from the atmosphere to the earth as
diffuse sky radiation, thus slightly increasing the total amount of solar

6

1 .4

1 .5

1 .6

energy available at the earth's surface. Clouds, which cover roughly
half the earth's surface at any given time, block much of the sun's
direct radiation but still pass a considerable quantity in diffuse form.
Taking all these factors into account, a square foot of land at 45°
latitude, in a location with a 50 percent incidence of cloud cover,
receives about 75 kilowatt-hours of direct solar radiation each year,
plus roughly another 20 kilowatt-hours of d i f fu se sky radiation, for a
total of nearly 100 kilowatt-hours annually. A square meter of land
receives almost 11 times these quantities.
The sun imparts little heat directly to the earth's atmosphere.
Instead, the ground and objects on it are warmed by solar radiation,
and they in tu rn pass some of the ir heat to the air. The rate at which
a patch of ground is warmed depends on several factors, beginning
with the amount of solar energy that arrives at the surface. Assuming
equal atmospheric conditions, a patch of ground nearer the equator
receives more solar heat than one far ther from the equator because
of the higher angle of incidence of the sun's rays on the ground. For
much the same reason, a south-facing hillside receives a h igher
intensity of sunlight than a flat field, and a steeply north-facing slope
may receive none at all.
A second factor affecting the rate at which ground is warmed
is the portion of solar radiation that the ground reflects. This is
typically about 20 percent, leaving 80 percent to be absorbed. Of
this 80 percent, a portion may go to warm the soil and thus is stored
temporarily. Some is expended in evaporating moisture from the
soil. Some is radiated at long in f ra red wavelengths from the soil back
to the sky and to cooler terrestrial objects that the patch of ground
can "see": treetops, fences, buildings, and so forth. The remainder of
the 80 percent warms the air above the patch of ground.

Night Sky Radiation

So far we have been considering the tremendous in f lux of solar radi-
ation on the earth in the daytime. At night, the flow is reversed, with
the dark side of the earth radiating energy into space at infrared
wavelengths ranging from 4,000 to 80,000 nm, considerably longer
than the sun's in f ra red rays. On cloudy, hum id nights, water vapor
in the atmosphere, which is particularly absorptive of this long-wave
infrared radiation, serves to block much of the outflow of energy, but
on clear, dry nights, a very powerful cooling effect is exerted by rapid
radiation from the warm earth to the cold blackness of the sky. Dew
f requen t ly condenses from the air onto radiationally cooled surfaces
of the ground and the roof surfaces of automobiles and buildings.
These cold surfaces cool the ad jacent air. A stagnant layer of cold
air may form near the ground in a stable atmospheric configuration

7

known as an inversion. Ground fog may form as moisture condenses
in this cold layer, and frost may occur along the ground even when
thermometers at eye level are reading temperatures well above
freezing. A nighttime wind tends to mix earth-cooled air with
warmer air, making dew, frost, and ground fog less likely to form.
Over bodies of water, the large heat capacity and convective mixing
of the water generally result in a less pronounced nocturnal cooling
of the air than over land.

Weather

If atmospheric conditions are the same in all parts of the world,
nighttime heat loss by radiation occurs at an equal rate regardless
of latitude. But daytime heat gain, as we have seen, is not equal
in all locations. On any day of the year, the tropics and the hemi-
sphere that is experiencing its warm season receive much more solar
radiation than do the polar regions and the colder hemisphere.
Averaged over the course of the year, the tropics and latitudes up
to about 40° receive more total heat than they lose by radiation.
Latitudes above 40° receive less total heat than they lose by radi-
ation. This inequality produces the necessary conditions for the
operation of a huge, global-scale engine that takes on heat in the
tropics and gives it off in the polar regions. Its working fluid is
the atmosphere, especially the moisture it contains. Air is heated
over the warm earth of the tropics, expands, rises, and flows away
both northward and southward at high altitudes, cooling as it goes.
It descends and flows toward the equator again from more nor ther ly
and southerly latitudes. Meanwhile, the earth's eastward rotation
deflects these currents westward along the earth's surface to form the
trade winds. Farther toward the poles, similar but weaker cells of air
convection are set in motion, resulting in a generally eastward flow
of air (1.7).
The heat of the sun evaporates water continuously from the seas
and land into the air. The warm, moist air thus produced eventually
rises, either because of convection or because the air is contained in
winds that blow up the slopes of rising landmasses. As the air rises, it
expands because of decreasing atmospheric pressure. As it expands,
it undergoes adiabatic cooling until it reaches the temperature at
which its moisture begins to condense. The condensing moisture
evolves latent heat into the air, offsetting some of the cooling effect
of expansion. But a slower rate of cooling con t inues as the air con-
tinues to rise; moisture continues to condense; and clouds of water
droplets and ice crystals are formed. Considerable quantities of
water are often involved; a single large cumu lus cloud is estimated
to weigh 100,000 tons (io8 kg).

8

1 .7

Precipitation

The exact mechanism by which a cloud releases its moisture is not
well understood, but it generally involves both fu r ther cooling and
the presence in the cloud of microscopic particles of dust around
which the tiny cloud droplets can aggregate to form raindrops or ice
crystals. Precipitation tends to be heavier over mountain ranges
because of the rapid cooling of the rising winds and is usually sparse
to the leeward side of mountains, where the descending winds have
already been wrung dry of excess water (1.8). Rainwater and snow
melt are gathered by the earth's surface into streams and rivers and
eventually flow to the seas, evaporating moisture into the air along
the way to start the cycle again.
In the temperate latitudes, large masses of warm, moist air from
more tropical climates advance northward to meet masses of cooler,
drier air from the polar regions. The warm front, characterized by
low barometric pressure, and the higher-pressure cold front collide
and swirl about each other, increasing local wind velocities and
releasing precipitation where the warm air is suddenly cooled by
contact with the cold air (1.9). Weather patterns in the temperate

9

1 .8

1 .9

latitudes are predom inan t ly the result of such fron tal systems. They
are less stable and predictable than tropical weather, which is dom-
inated by the general sun-induced circulation of the atmosphere.
Wind serves an important func t ion in the earth's weather,
d is tr ibu t ing both water and heat more equ i tab ly about the globe.
Wind flow at high altitudes is generally rapid and fa i r ly smooth.
In the v ic in i ty of the earth's su r face, however, the w ind is subjected
to in terference from hills, mountains, trees, buildings, and various
convective flows of air. The average w ind speed is progressively
reduced by these obstacles nearer the ground, and the wind flow
becomes more tu rbu len t, fluctuating rapidly in both velocity and
direction.
The atmospheric engine converts vast quantities of energy from
sunlight to wind and from sunlight to fa l l ing precipitation. Despite
its being only about 3 percent eff ic ient in transform ing radiation
into motion, the engine operates at a level that would be measured
in trillions of horsepower (multiples of io12 watts). But this immense
flow of energy is d i f f icu lt to tap for direct human use: wind is d i f fuse,
and it is d i f f icu lt to harness at the high altitudes and polar latitudes
where it is strongest. Only a m inu te percentage of all precipitation
falls in moun ta in valleys that may be dammed for power generation;
the rest lands on the oceans or on watersheds that are not suitable for
hydroelectric installations.

Climatic Effects of Land and Water

Both water and land are capable of absorbing and storing heat, but
water is considerably more eff ic ient as a storage med ium. As a result,
large bodies of water tend to moderate the temperatures in the ir
vicinities very strongly, whereas large landmasses exert only a weak
effect on air temperatures. This is par t icu lar ly noticeable where
prevailing w inds pass over water before reaching land. The West
Coast of the United States and Canada, und er the in f luence of the
prevailing west w inds off the Pacific Ocean, has a much m i lder
climate, cooler in summer and warmer in w in ter, than does the East
Coast, where the same prevailing west winds come off the contin-
ental landmass. Water can also transport heat for great distances,
as in the case of the warm Atlantic Gulf Stream, which gathers heat
in the tropics and carries it nor thward to soften (and moisten)
the weather in western Europe. London, warmed by w inds off the
Gulf Stream, has little subfreez ing weather in winter, whereas
Minneapolis, landlocked in the central United States at a somewhat
more southerly latitude than London, has considerable snow and
protracted periods of bitter cold. Thus latitude alone is not a precise
index of climate.

10

Microclimate

At an individual building site, even more climatic variables may
come into play. The apparent movement of the sun across the site is
rigidly fixed according to the geographic latitude, but the effect of
the sun's radiation varies according to the orientation and steepness
of the ground slope, the infrared absorbency of the ground surface,
the presence or absence of shading vegetation, and reflected and
reradiated solar heat from su r round ing buildings and geological
features. The air temperature on the site is fu r ther affected by such
factors as the altitude of the site above sea level, its proximity to
bodies of water, the direction of prevailing winds, and the presence
of shading vegetation. Fountains, waterfalls, and trees on the site
may d iffuse enough moisture into the air to raise the local hum id i ty
and depress the local air temperature. Local wind patterns are
largely dependent on local obstructions to the passage of wind such
as forests, trees, buildings, and hills. Plowed ground or dark pave-
ment is warmed by the sun to a higher temperature than are sur-
rounding areas, thereby increasing the radiational heating of nearby
surfaces and causing small updrafts of warm air. Topography may
have an important role in local convective airflow: a valley may be
more protected from wind than a hilltop, but on still, cool nights,
rivers of cold air flow down the valley to form pools in low areas
while warmer air rises toward the hilltop. Cities, too, affect local
weather. The energy released by vehicles and buildings is gradually
dissipated in the form of heat to the outdoors, often warming the air
by 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit (3°—6°C) above that of the surround-
ing countryside. The artificially warmed buildings and vehicles of
large cities often create considerable convective updrafts that can
have significant climatic effects on a regional scale.

Other Solar Phenomena

In addition to its thermal effec ts— those of warm ing the earth and
creating wind and p rec ip i ta t ion— the sun also has important
nonthermal effects. It provides visible light; it furnishes energy for
photosynthesis in plants; and it radiates ultraviolet light.

Daylighting
The role of sunlight in illuminating buildings will be discussed later
in detail, but we should note here that direct sunlight is often far too
bright for comfortable seeing. Much more useful dur ing the daytime
is the visible light scattered by the atmosphere, or the even, restful
illumination of a shaded area. If we need light at night, or under
dense cloud cover, we must use alternative sources of i l lum ina t ion.

11

1 .10

Photosynthesis
It would be d i f f icu lt to overemphasize the value to humank ind of
the photosynthetic reaction in plants. We could not live without it.
The hum an organism cannot create nu tr ien ts from sunlight. Plants,
however, produce sugars, starches, and proteins from water, carbon
dioxide, nitrogen, and soil nu tr ien ts through solar-fueled processes.
They take carbon dioxide from the air du r ing photosynthesis and
give back oxygen as a waste product. (Animals consume oxygen in
the ir metabolic processes and give off carbon dioxide, thus fo rm ing
the other ma jor link in a self-sustaining environmental chain.)
Simultaneously, people and other animals eat whatever plants they
are capable of digesting and/or the flesh of other animals that
ultimately were nourished by plants. Animal excrement contains
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, carbon, and other substances that
become available to plants through soil and water, and thus food
production is perpetuated 
through other self-sustaining chains
(1.10). Even dead plants and animals have a role to play. Their
corpses are broken down by other an ima ls and by microorganisms
into basic chemical compounds that become once more part of the
soil, available to nourish plants and begin life again.
Photosynthesis also produces useful nonfood products such as
wood for construction, fibers for the manu fac tu re of fabrics and
paper, decorative plants, flowers, ornamental trees and shrubs, and
climbing vines. Photosynthesis is responsible for our entire supply of
fossil fu e l s— co a l, oil, and ga s—wh ich were formed millions of years
ago by the effects of geological heat and pressure on large masses of
decaying vegetable matter. Except for geothermal energy, nuc lear
energy, and tides, all our energy sources are solar in origin: not only
direct sunlight but also wind energy, water energy, plant energy,
and, of course, fossil fue ls.
Ultraviolet radiation from the sun is important for its role in photo-
synthesis, but it has other roles as well. Ultraviolet radiation kills
many ha rm ful microorganisms, an effect that is important in pur ify-
ing the atmosphere and in r idd ing sun l it surfaces of disease-carrying
bacteria. Vitamin D, essential to hum an nu tr i t ion, is formed by the
action of ultraviolet light on the skin. On the negative side, ultra-
violet rays are responsible for the rapid and soon fatal bu rn ing of
human skin exposed too long to sunlight and for the high incidence
of skin cancer among light-skinned people who are constantly in
the sun. Ultraviolet rays also fade dyes in fabrics, decompose many
plastics, and contribute to the deterioration of paints, roofing, wood,
and other organic bu i ld ing materials. It is because of these negative
effects that there is concern about preserving the high-altitude
ozone layer that intercepts most ultraviolet radiation before it can
reach the earth.

12

Other Aspects of the Outdoor Environment

The earth's geology has a great deal to do with the ways in which
we build. Many of our bu i ld ing materials, of course, are m ineral in
origin: earth, stone, concrete, brick, glass, gypsum, asbestos, steel,
a lum inum, copper, and dozens of others. In many cases the simplest
of these can be obtained directly from the building site or from
sources in the neighborhood. The subsoil, subsurface water levels,
topsoil, and rocks of a site affect the sorts of excavations, founda-
tions, and landscaping that are likely to be undertaken. The con-
tours of the s i te— i ts hills, valleys, and s lopes—he lp determine how
water will drain dur ing storms, where erosion of soil may occur,
where roadways and paths may run without being excessively steep,
what areas will be more or less sheltered from wind, what areas will
be exposed most favorably to sunlight, where various sorts of plants
will grow best, and where and how the buildings will be built. These
are exceedingly complex factors, rich in both positive and negative
implications for an architect or engineer.
Certain biological factors of the building site are important, too.
Microorganisms are universally present in such forms as the bacteria,
molds, and fungi that break down dead vegetable and animal matter
into soil nutrients. Higher plants such as grasses, weeds, flowers, shrubs,
and trees play important roles in trapping precipitation, preventing
soil erosion, providing shade, deflecting wind, and other functions
already mentioned under the heading of photosynthesis. Insects can
affect building design: Biting insects and food-contaminating insects
must be excluded from interior spaces. Building-destroying insects
such as termites need to be discouraged from attacking the structure.
Native reptiles, birds, and mammals also may figure importantly in
the planning process. We may want bird songs to filter into the
breakfast room, but not the birds themselves. Mice, rats, raccoons,
foxes, deer, squirrels, and the neighbor's dog, to name a few, can be
nuisance animals in one's building. But a cow, sheep, or horse may
be welcome in a barn, and one's own dog, cat, or hamster in a house.
Nearby buildings often affect what we are likely to bu i ld. They
may shade certain areas of the site, divert the wind in unforeseen
ways, upset natural drainage patterns, or cause areas of the site to
lack visual or acoustical privacy (1.11). Buildings or remains of build-
ings erected on the site by previous builders may have to be dealt
with, along with their associated driveways, parking areas, walks,
gardens, wells, sewage disposal systems, and underground utilities.
Bad land-use practices of previous or abutting owners may have
caused problems of weeds or soil erosion.
Environmental factors caused by people include air that is pol-
luted with smoke, gases, dust, or chemical particles; noise from

!3

1 .11

t ra f f ic, industrial processes, a nearby discotheque, or a rowdy fam i ly
next door; and surface or ground water that is fou led with sewage
or chemicals. Sadly, too, a designer must commonly come to terms
with the fact that the outdoor env ironment includes unknown per-
sons who would deface, destroy, or in t rude on the bu i ld ing being
designed, often before its construction is complete and almost
always to the de tr iment of the bu i ld ing and its occupants.
This, then, for better and for worse, is the outdoor env ironmen t,
portions of which we may select and mod ify for hum an occupancy.
It has a wa rm ing sun that rises and sets, a procession of seasons,
a more-or-less predictable pattern of weather, a un ique geology, a
varied colony of flora and fauna, and a history of hum an use and
misuse extending through the present and into the fu tu re. We must
ask ourselves who will occupy and use this env ironmen t, what their
needs are, and how their needs differ from what this environment
can fu rn i sh.

Further Reading

David I. Blumenstock. The Ocean of Air. New Brunswick, N.J., Rutgers University
Press, 1959.

T. F. Gaskell and Martin Morris. World Climate: The Weather, the Environment
and Man. London, Thames and Hudson, 1979.

H

2

Tne Human
Environment

The Human Body

The quality of a hum an environment can be measured only in
terms of its effect on the people who experience it. But people, both
physically and emotionally, are creatures not easily understood,
and evaluations of quality are seldom simple. Even a simple ques-
tion such as "Is this place warm enough?" does not have a simple
answer in quantitative terms, for the same person, under varying
circumstances of season of the year, amount of clothing, radiant
temperature, relative humidity, and air movement, will find the
place exactly "warm enough" at a range of air temperatures extend-
ing over many degrees, a surprising spread for an an imal whose
internal temperature cannot vary by more than a couple of
degrees either way without distress. To understand how to evaluate
environmental quality, then, we must begin by looking within the
body itself to find out how it works.
In its most fundamen tal mechanical behavior, the human body
is a heat engine. The fuel for the engine is derived from food, in the
form of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats. The digestive process
breaks down these nutrients by means of various chemicals,
bacteria, and enzymes into substances that the body can use. These
useful substances are then pumped into the bloodstream, which
transports them to the living cells throughout the body. Waste
products and ha rm ful substances are filtered out in the digestive
process and stored for periodic excretion. Urine consists primarily of
nitrogenous wastes dissolved in water. Feces, though mainly water,
contain the indigestible fibers, minerals, and particles that could not
be utilized in the metabolic process.

15

We need a regular supply of water to facilitate the chemical pro-
cesses in the body, to move the products of these processes about
the body, and to help cool the body. We need air too, because in the
critical set of chemical reactions that combust the food-derived fue ls
to keep the human heat engine operating, oxygen is a necessary
reactant. When we breathe air into our lungs, we absorb a portion of
its oxygen into our bloodstream. We mix carbon dioxide and water,
which are waste products of the combustion, with the air in our lungs
before we breathe it out again. Less than a fifth of the air 's oxygen
is replaced by carbon dioxide in each lung fu l, but a con t inuous
supply of outside air must be available to the body to avoid oxygen
depletion and carbon dioxide narcosis through repeated breathing
of the same air (2.1).

2 .1

16

How the Body Cools Itself

The normal internal operating temperature of the human engine
is just under 99° Fahrenheit (37°C), a temperature that must be
maintained within narrow tolerances in order to avoid metabolic
ma lfunc t ion. But our bodies are only about one-fifth eff ic ient in
converting food energy to mechanical work. They must give off four
times as much heat as they use in order to maintain a stable internal
temperature. An adult working at a desk produces excess heat at
about the same rate as does a loo-watt lightbulb. The same person
walking generates two to three times as much heat and, when
exercising strenuously, six to ten times (2.2). These necessary rates
of cooling are achieved through an admirable collection of physio-
logical mechanisms.
The body is continuously cooled by the heating of respired air,
the vaporization of water from the lungs and breathing passages, the
convection and radiation of heat from the surface of the skin, and
the d i f fus ion of small amounts of water vapor through the skin (2.3).
The surface temperature of our skin, and hence its rate of heat loss,
is controlled by the dilatation or constriction (enlarging or shrink-
ing) of the small blood vessels of the skin. As the vessels dilate, the
flow of warm blood near the surface of the body increases, and the
skin temperature rises so as to give off heat more quickly to the sur-
round ing environment. The increased volume of blood, which is a
good thermal conductor, also partially displaces fatty tissues, which
are poor thermal conductors, near the surface of the body. This
increases direct heat loss from the under ly ing body tissues to the
surrounding environment. This very sensitive set of mechanisms,
known as the vasomotor system, is able to regulate the body's rate of
heat loss under a fairly wide range of conditions.
When the rate of cooling by respiration, skin diffusion, skin
radiation, and skin convection is insuff ic ient to meet our body's
demands, we sweat. Water is exuded from the pores of the skin and
evaporates into the atmosphere. The latent heat of vaporization that
is required by this evaporation is furn ished primarily by the body.
Large quantities of heat can be lost in this way. Perspiration is
suff ic ient under most conditions to provide the additional cooling
required, but its effectiveness depends on the amount of moisture in
the air. If the surrounding air is very dry, perspiration evaporates very
quickly, and considerable cooling is possible even when the air
temperature is higher than our body temperature. When the humidity
of the surrounding air is high, evaporation is slow, and so the rate of
perspiration increases as the body attempts to compensate. The situ-
ation can be helped to some extent by increasing the rate of air
movement past the body: the moving air is more effective not only

!?

2 .2

2 .3

in evaporating perspiration but also in speeding convective heat loss
from the skin, provided that the air temperature is lower than skin
temperature (2.4). If the body is in a situation in which none of these
strategies is sufficient, however, the deep-body temperature will rise
until metabolic func t ion is impa ired, bringing heat stroke and death.

Excessive Rates of Body Cooling

Under conditions in wh ich heat is being removed too qu ick ly from
the body, heat loss is especially rapid from the back of the neck, the
head, the back, and the extremities. Clothing and fu rn i tu re that are
designed to obstruct the flow of heat from these areas are particu-
larly effective in aiding thermal comfort under cold conditions (2.5).
Because the body can transfer heat through the bloodstream from
one of its parts to another, symptoms of excessive heat loss are some-
times d i f f icu lt to interpret. Warm footwear may not be of much help
for cold feet if rapid cooling is occurr ing in some other part of the
body. Outdoorspeople have a saying, "If your feet are cold, put your
hat on." This seemingly odd strategy works in a surpr is ing ly high
proportion of cases, because the head, with a high ratio of heat
transfer surface to internal volume, is capable of radiating and con-
vecting very large amounts of heat to a cold environment, much as
a relatively small automobile radiator can cool a very large engine.
The body responds to excessive heat loss from any of its parts by
lowering the temperature of the feet and hands in order to keep vital
in ternal organs at an optimum temperature. If rapid heat loss con-
tinues, "goose pimpling" occurs, in wh ich the hairs of the skin are
erected to trap still air as an insulating layer next to the skin. One's
instinct generally leads one, quite correctly, to cut down the exposed
surface area of the body by folding the arms, hunch ing the shoulders,
and bringing the legs tightly together. Another helpful response is to
exercise in order to raise the level of metabolic heat production to
match the rate at which heat is being lost (2.6). If these measures
are insu f f ic ien t, sh iv e r ing— an involuntary form of heat-generating
muscu lar exerc ise—commences, and if even this cannot restore
equ i l ib r ium, the deep-body temperature will begin to fa l l, a condi-
tion known as hypothermia. Hypothermia can be reversed in its
early stages by the direct conduction of heat into the body by means
of hot food and d r ink, a hot bath or sauna, or snuggling with a f r iend,
but in its later stages a deepening coma is followed by death.
The hum an body is not comfortable when it is placed under
thermal stress. Excessive sweating is uncomfortable and annoying.
So is goose p imp l ing or shivering. Prolonged overheating or over-
cooling of the body results in increased fatigue and weakens resis-
tance to disease. A suitable hum an thermal environment, then, is

18

2 .4

2 .5

2 .6

2 .7

fundamen ta l ly one in wh ich the body is able to give off its excess
heat at the required rate without having to resort to sweating, hud-
dling, goose pimpling, or shivering.

Other Requirements for Human Life

Besides food, water, fresh air, and optimum thermal conditions, the
hum an body has other environmental requirements. The most vital
of these is adequate sanitation (2.7). The body is susceptible to attack
by a very large assortment of bacteria, viruses, and fung i. The skin,
respiratory system, and digestive tract are par t icu lar ly fertile environ-
ments for these microorganisms. The basic sanitary requirements
for a human environment include the provision of food and drink-
ing water that are free of ha rm ful microorganisms, the prompt
removal and processing of excreta and food wastes to render them
free of disease-causing organisms, adequate ventilation to carry
away air-borne bacteria and excessive moisture, adequate sunlight to
dry and sterilize the environment, the exclusion of disease-carrying
rodents and insects from buildings, and facilities for washing food-
stuffs, dishes, skin, hair, and clothing.
Inadequate sanitation is costly in hum an terms: Poor ventilation
encourages tuberculosis and other respiratory diseases. Contamin-
ated food and water spread hepatitis and typhoid. Pest-borne diseases
include typhus, yellow fever, malaria, sleeping sickness, encephal-
itis, plague, and various infestations of parasites. These are but a few
examples.
Human eyes and ears, the most important sensory organs of the
body, have their own sets of environmental requirements. The eye
can be damaged if it looks even momentarily at the sun or if it looks
too long at a sunlit landscape of snow or light-colored sand. Seeing
becomes d i f f icu lt or pa in ful if the eye must look at a very bright
object against a very dark background, and vice versa. Seeing is
d i f f icu lt and less accurate at very low levels of illumination. The eye
is able to ad ju st in order to see objects fa i r ly well at moderately
low levels of i l lum ina t ion, but the ad ju s tment mechanism, which
probably evolved in order to give humans the ability to see du r ing
the twilight period of the day, is very slow, acting over a period of
minutes.
The ear is somewhat similar in its characteristics: It can be dam-
aged by sounds of excessive loudness, especially if they occur over
a protracted period of time. Hearing is d i f f icu lt at very low sound
intensities or if a strong background of noise obscures the sounds
that one wishes to hear. But there is one very important d i f fe rence
between our eyes and our ears: By closing our eyelids, we can shut
off nearly all visual stimuli, whereas we cannot stop our ears so

!9

easily (2.8). We can find visual relief in any but the very brightest
environments, but for relief from a d is turb ing ly noisy environment,
we have to move to a quieter location.
The human body needs space in which to move— to work, to
play, or merely to ma in ta in its muscle tone, skeletal movement,
and heart and lung func t ion through exercise. Even when at rest,
the body needs to be able to shift about in order to unbu rden and
relax its various components in tu rn.
The body is soft and requires protection from in ju ry. It needs
smooth surfaces underfoot to prevent ankle damage or tripping. It
needs properly proportioned stairs to move up or down in a bu i ld ing
without fa l l ing. It needs guardrails to prevent it from accidentally
fa l l ing over edges of surfaces. Hard or sharp objects must be kept out
of the volumes of space normally traversed by the body in its move-
ments. Fire and very hot objects must be kept away from the delicate
human skin. The body must be kept safe from falling objects, explo-
sions, poisons, corrosive chemicals, ha rm ful radiation, and electric
shocks, any of which could cause it severe i n j u ry or sudden death.

The Environmental Necessities of Human Civilization

To this point, we have considered the hum an body primarily as a ma-
chine that will not run properly except under a certain set of conditions.
But of course, a person is much more than just a physical mechanism.
People seek out social activities, those contacts with others through
wh ich they create, produce, learn, grow, relax, play, and enjoy life.
At the most fundamen tal level, each person requires a place to
sleep, facilities with which to carry out the basics of personal hy-
giene, a source of water, sources of food, and facilities to prepare the
food for eating. But most people live as part of a fam i ly and in some-
what less Spartan surroundings, a place called home. Family l i fe
requires places for procreation and the rearing of children. Preparing
and eating food become elaborate processes in the fam i ly, a source
of en joyment as well as bodily nu tr i t ion and a setting for social inter-
action at several levels. Home becomes a place for certain kinds of
work carried out by various members of the family: pursu ing hobbies,
studying, wr i t ing letters, cleaning and repairing things, managing
financial a f fa i rs. Home is also a place for play and for entertaining
fr iends. Home is where you hang your h a t— a long with your coat,
your shoes, your wardrobe, your dishes, your books, and all the rest
of your belongings. It is meant to be a safe, secure, fam i l iar place,
filled with the things of one's life, closed and private at times, open
and outgoing at other times, at the option of its occupants (2.9).
Outside the home, we requ ire a variety of other sorts of places.
We need workplaces—workshops, warehouses, markets, offices,

20

2 .8

2 .9

2 .10

studios, barns, labora tor ies—where the goods of civilization are
designed, produced, and distributed. Each workplace has to furnish
the basic necessities of life, plus the special requirements of the pro-
cesses that take place there. We need gathering places of various
sorts, places of worship, places to exercise, places to play, places
in which to be entertained, places in which to view interesting
and beau t iful things, and places in which to carry out the functions
of government and education. Large numbers of people need to be
accommodated at once in these types of facilities and all their needs
satisfied simultaneously (2.10).
Human society requires mobility. We need to move around in
order to get to work or school and to en joy the various amenities of
a city or a countryside. A network for human movement must be
provided, starting with the doors of rooms; the hallways, stairs, and
elevators that connect them; the entrances that merge the building
and the outdoors; and continuing with footpaths, streets, roads, and
long-distance mechanisms for moving both people and goods (2.11).

2 .11

21

This requires clear rights-of-way, smooth pavements, func t ional
vehicles, convenient stations of t r a n s f e r— a nd unders tandab le infor-
mation on how to get where one is going.
These requirements of a high-quality h um an environment are
nume rous and often exacting. They inc lude the physiological and
social requ iremen ts that we have iden t if ied, as well as psychological
requirements that are much more d i f f icu lt to define. Taken together,
they describe an env ironment that exists nowhere in the natural
world. The outdoor env ironment is too variable, too frequen t ly ex-
treme, too often destructive and unstable, to be hospitable to hum an
life and civilization. In the course of its development, humank ind
has had to learn not merely to seek sheltered areas of the natural land-
scape but also to create buildings, wh ich are ar t if ic ia l ly sheltered
and conditioned areas of more constant and comfortable qualities
than Nature is capable of providing on its own.

Further Reading

B. Givoni. Man, Climate, and Architecture. New York, Elsevier, 1969, pp. 19-95.

22

3

The Concept or Shelter

Shelter at its most basic is not a hum an invention; it is something we
seek instinctively, as do all animals, in a world that is seldom attuned
exactly to our physiological and social needs. On a hot summer day,
we picnic under a tree or near a shady waterfall or cascade. On bitter
winter days, we gravitate instinctively toward the lee side of any
landscape fea ture that will deflect the w ind, especially if a patch
of warming sunlight is available there. The experienced outdoor
traveler, when selecting a spot on which to roll out a sleeping bag
for the night in any season of the year, avoids the low spots and
valleys, which channel nighttime flows of cold air and moisture,
and, animal-like, beds down on the higher ground, perhaps on an
eastward slope, to be wakened and warmed by the morning sun.
In an agrarian society, the search for shelter begins with a jud i-
cious use of the na tural landscape. People choose building sites
for their sheltering qua l i t ies—or ien ta t ion with respect to sun and
prevailing winds, good drainage, interesting or useful topographic
features, trees and vegetation that give shade or deflect the wind,
and sources of clean water. In northern climates, higher ground that
slopes toward the south is reserved for growing the most essential
crops. Farmers know from personal experience that the earliest
frosts of au tumn and the latest frosts of spring occur in the low spots
of the landscape. They understand that plants in south-sloping fields
receive life-giving sunlight of an intensity higher than that of flat or
north-sloping fields (3.1). Rural towns are sited, where possible, next
to rivers or springs on leeward, generally southerly slopes.
Artificial shelter starts with such gentle manipulations of the
landscape as planting a tree for shade or a row of shrubbery for a
windbreak. A simple, freestanding east-west wall of piled-up rocks,
by means of its vertical profile and its thermal capacity, can create

23

3 .1

3 .2

3 .3

3 .4

a small zone of shaded coolness immediately to its north in hot
weather and a sun-warmed, less w indy zone to its south in cold
weather (3.2). The wall absorbs some of the sun's heat du r ing the
day and releases it gradually after sundown, extending the sheltered
zone's period of habitability.
In progressively more elaborate stages of environmental interven-
tion, a paving of stones or a platform of wood provides a dr ier footing
for the inhabitant. A lean-to roof keeps off rain and snow (3.3). East and
west walls increase the wind-deflecting capabilities of the shelter
and in terfere little with the entry of winter sunshine. At night, a
fire at the mouth of this simple shelter warms its occupants by both
direct and wall-reflected radiation, and a small portion of its heat
is stored in the stones to moderate the temperature of the sheltered
space even after the fire has died (3.4). One can easily imagine fur-
ther steps in the improvement of such a rud imen tary shelter: the
use of fabr ic or skins to close off the open side after dark or on cloudy
days, the moving of the fire to an in ter ior hearth, and so on (3.5).
Perhaps many primitive bu i ld ing forms evolved in much this same
way, to jo in later in the stream of development that led ultimately to
modern bu i ld ing techniques.
Today's buildings are much more complicated than this primi-
tive example, of course. Each genuine new improvement in shelter
wrought by our ancestors was at first a novelty, but soon afterward
became standard practice and then, finally, the acceptable m in imum
as later improvements superseded it. A shelter that represented the
height of comfort and convenience to one generation might be con-
sidered substandard a generation or two later. We have grown to expect
more and more of our buildings, to the point that buildings now are
expected to perform func t ions that are not strictly "sheltering" at all,

3 .5

24

such as providing water, removing wastes, and furn ish ing energy
for use in mechanical tools and electronic entertainment devices.
Our buildings have become, in fact, comprehensive life-support
mechanisms.
Many of the func t ions we now expect of our buildings were
formerly the func t ions of other devices. Clothing and shelter are
to a considerable extent interchangeable in function, but with the
passage of time, people have tended to ask less of their clothing and
proportionally more of their shelter. Some func t ions formerly
expected of pieces of fu rn i tu re, such as the provision of enclosed
storage for various household articles, are steadily being subsumed
by bu i ld ing components such as closets and cupboards. Sinks,
bathtubs, cookstoves, and automatic dishwashers, once portable
devices, are nowadays fixed parts of a house. Offices were once lit by
portable lamps that had to be refilled periodically with oil (3.6).
Today, office illumination is usually provided by fixtures that are
integral with the building, and the building conducts the energizing
electricity directly to the fixtures (3.7).

Functions of a Building

Our concept of what a building should do is much more than what
would be found in a dictionary definition of shelter. Functionally, a
bu i ld ing is what we expect it to be, and our expectations have grown
very large. The list that follows attempts to include all the functional
expectations we are likely to have for a building at the present time,
arranged roughly in descending order according to the relative
importance of each to the support of life:

1. We expect a bu i ld ing to provide most of the immediate neces-
sities for human metabolism:

A. Clean air for breathing
B. Clean water for drinking, food preparation, cleaning, and
flushing of wastes
c. In many types of buildings, facilities for the preparation
and consumption of food
D. Removal and recycling of wastes, including excrement,
wash water, food wastes, and rubbish

2. We expect a building to create the necessary conditions for
human thermal comfort:

A. Control of the mean radiant temperature
B. Control of the air temperature

25

3 .6

3 .7

C. Control of the thermal characteristics of surfaces con-
tacted directly by the hum an body
D. Control of hum id i ty and the flow of water vapor
E. Control of air circulation

3. We expect a bu i ld ing to create the necessary conditions for
nonthermal sensory comfort, efficiency, and privacy:

A. Optimal seeing conditions
B. Visual privacy
C. Optimal hearing conditions
D. Acoustical privacy

4. We expect a bu i ld ing to control the entry and exit of living
creatures of every kind, from viruses to elephants, inc lud ing
human beings.
5. We expect a bu i ld ing to distribute concentrated energy to
convenient points for use in powering various lights, tools,
and appliances.
6. We expect a bu i ld ing to provide up-to-date channels of
connection and commun ica t ion with the world outside:
windows, telephones, mailboxes, computer networks, video
cables, satellite dishes, and so on.
7. We expect a bu i ld ing to facilitate bodily comfort, safety, and
productive activity by providing useful surfaces: floors, walls,
stairs, shelves, countertops, benches, and the like.
8. We expect a bu i ld ing to provide stable support for the weights
of all the people, belongings, and architectural devices in the
bu i ld ing and to provide su f f ic ient structural resistance to the
physical forces of snow, w ind, and earthquake.
9. We expect a bu i ld ing to protect its own structure, surfaces,
internal mechanical and electrical systems, and other archi-
tectural devices from wetting by precipitation or other water.
10. We expect a bu i ld ing to ad ju st to its own normal movements,
such as founda t ion settlement, 
thermal expansion and
contraction, and movement 
induced by changes 
in
moisture content of bu i ld ing materials, without damage to
itself or its contents.
11. We expect a bu i ld ing to fu rn ish reasonable protection to its
occupants, its contents, and itself against damage by fire.
12. We expect a bu i ld ing to be built w i thout excessive expense or
d i f f icu l ty.
13. We expect a bu i ld ing to be capable of being operated, main-
tained, and changed in a useful, economical manner.

26

This list begins with expectations that arise more or less naturally
from human needs amid a hostile outdoor environment. From item
8 to the end of the list, however, the expectations are of a d ifferent
sort. They arise largely from needs created by the bu i ld ing itself and
relate only in a secondary way to hum an needs. A structural beam,
for example, is not related in a primary way to the solution of any
human need. It is a secondary device supporting a surface (a floor
or roo f) that is of primary importance to the users of a building.
Movement and fire are problems that arise only because the build-
ing exists, but unless the building solves these problems of its own,
they constitute a danger to its occupants.
The following chapters explain the ways in which buildings meet
these func t ional expectations. They proceed in the same general
order as this list, with several exceptions: All bu i ld ing func t ions
having to do with movement of air are discussed together in the
chapter entitled "Controlling Air Movement," and the chapter
entitled "Keeping Water Out" incorporates the material on all
the water-resisting functions of buildings. Various aspects of the
func t ion of controlling the entry and exit of living creatures are dis-
cussed in several of the chapters; this func t ion is far too diverse to
fit logically into a single chapter.
It is noted throughout the book that although we have complex
func t ional expectations of our buildings and complex ways of meet-
ing some of these expectations, most of the expectations can be met
by any well-informed designer, even in very large buildings, with
architectural devices as straightforward and direct as the instinc-
tively sought, simple shelters of the natural landscape.

27

This page intentionally left blank 

How Buildings Work

This page intentionally left blank 

4

Buildingf Function

In order to understand how a building works, we can dissect it and
study its various elemental functions. But few bu i ld ing func t ions
take place in isolation. Almost every component of a building serves
more than one function, with some components commonly serving
ten or more simultaneously, and these func t ions are heavily inter-
dependent. For example, if we decide to build the partitions in a
school building of thin sheets of gypsum wallboard over a framework
of steel studs, instead of bricks and mortar, we will affect the thermal
properties of the building, its acoustical qualities, the quality and
quantity of light in the classrooms, how the wiring and piping are
installed, the usefulness of the wall surfaces, the deadweight that the
structure of the bu i ld ing must support, the fire resistance of the
building, which trades will construct it, and how it will be maintained.
Some func t ions of the school bu i ld ing will be improved by chang-
ing from brickwork to gypsum wallboard, and some will be impaired.
A building has its own ecology, a delicate internal balance of con-
nected mechanisms that function not in isolation but as a richly
interconnected whole. The accompanying diagram shows how the
functions we expect of buildings are linked with one another (4.1).
A designer cannot expect to change the way in which one func t ion
is served without affecting other functions. Thus our dissection runs
the risk of overlooking or obscuring natural linkages among the vari-
ous bu i ld ing func t ions and of giving too simplistic a view of how a
building works. We will attempt to m in im ize these risks in the final
chapter, which discusses the combination of elemental functions in
common components of buildings. Until then, as we read the inter-
ven ing pages, we constantly ought to be asking questions about the
connectedness of things: What are all the functional repercussions
of a very massive building? Of a light-colored or a dark-colored
building? Of a sunny building? Of a building built entirely of wood?

31

4 .1

Of a building in a windy location? What are all the ways in which
we may warm a bu i ld ing, cool a bu i ld ing, or i l lum ina te a building?
These questions come naturally to m ind in response to themes that
recur again and again under various func t ional headings, and the
answers, as they accumu la te, begin to reveal the larger func t ional
patterns that unde r l ie every bu i ld ing.

32

5

Providing? Water

Buildings and settlements require an adequate supply of clean water
for drinking, cooking, washing, industrial processes, and agriculture.
This requires a system that has three basic components: a source of
water; a means to pu r i fy the water, if necessary; and a way to dis-
tribute the water to points of use inside buildings.

Sources of Water

In primitive circumstances people dip water into small containers
from ponds, streams, or rivers. If the water is free of harmful
substances, they simply drink it on the spot or carry it short
distances before using it. If the water contains bacteria or other
microorganisms, people soon learn to boil the water, which kills
the microscopic life forms, and make tea or coffee to drink.
Where surface water is unavailable or salty, primitive societies
usua l ly capture rainwater from roofs of buildings or other catchment
areas and collect it in subterranean cisterns, from which it is drawn
in buckets or by pumps.
To obtain the purest possible water in quantities suff ic ient for
a city, we attempt wherever possible to harness the atmospheric dis-
tillation process by collecting and impounding rainwater and snow
melt. For large municipal water systems, we may take over whole
mountain valleys as catchment areas and dam them to form storage
reservoirs. We closely regulate the human use of the catchment
areas and reservoirs in order to minimize water contamination.
Large aqueduct pipes carry the water from the reservoirs to the
municipality, with gravity usually furn ish ing the motive power.
Communities that are distant from sparsely inhabited mountains
are forced either to draw water of lesser purity from rivers or to tap

33

subterranean water flows with wells. Originally, wells were dug by
hand, the digger lining the deepening shaft with stones or bricks to
prevent cave-ins. It was a dirty, dangerous occupation. Wells today
are drilled by heavy, truck-mounted equ ipment that can grind its
way even through solid granite to depths of hund reds of feet if
necessary to find a water-bearing stratum in the earth.

Water Treatment

Well-water or water from moun ta in reservoirs usually requires little
or no treatment to make it suitable for h um an consumption. River
water and some waters from other sources requ i re trea tment for
various contaminants. Sand filters and settling basins remove
particulate matter. Aerating the water helps rid it of gaseous
pollutants and accelerates the breakdown of organic substances.
Chemical precipitation is used to remove such contaminants as iron
and lead compounds. Special filters may be necessary to remove
hydrogen sulfide, radon, or other dissolved gases. Finally, if necessary,
chlorine gas is dissolved in the water in controlled amoun ts to kill
microorganisms. Purification systems that use these mechanisms are
available at scales ranging from whole regions to ind iv idual houses.

Transporting Water to the Point of Use

Water is transported to, into, and through buildings by placing it under
pressure and using this pressure to drive it through cylindrical pipes.
Mun ic ipal water systems are usually pressurized by gravity: Water is
raised above the level of the buildings in reservoirs or water towers.
For every foot (0.3 m) of height, the water's own weight exerts a pres-
sure of about 0.43 pounds per square inch (3 kPa). If the water level
in a reservoir or water tower is 100 feet above the highest point of use,
the pressure at that point is 43 pounds per square inch or 300 kPa.
Water is distributed to the buildings of a city or town through a
grid of pipes under the streets. Fire hydrants are connected directly
to these pipes or, occasionally, to the ir own separate underground
supply network (5.1).
P lumb ing contractors or mun ic ipal crews make the connection
between understreet water mains and individual buildings (5.2).
They install an underground shutoff valve in the service pipe of each
bu i ld ing, most often at the curb or sidewalk, so that the local water
au thor i ty can shut off water service in case of emergency or nonpay-
ment of water bills. The flow of water is usually metered inside the
building, and charges are assessed periodically based on the amount
of water used. For simplicity, the cost of water is usually calculated to
cover the expenses of both water supply and sewage disposal services.

34

5 .1

5 .2

5 .3

Private Water Systems

In rural areas and in many small communities, each building must
develop its own supply of water. A few fortunate sites possess reliable
springs from which pure water can be drawn, but on most building
sites we must either catch rainfall or create a well.
Rainwater systems are still the most satisfactory water source in
areas of the world where subterranean water lies too deep to tap with
wells. Although a special catchment area may be constructed on an
unbu i lt portion of the site, it is generally more economical to use the
roof of the building to collect water. By means of gutters and pipes,
the water is brought to a cistern for storage, from which it can be
withdrawn by pump or by hand (5.3). Depending on the weather,
the size of the catchment area, and the volume of water storage pro-
vided, such a system may or may not be able to fu rn i sh suff ic ient
quantities of water for use throughout the year. Cleanliness of
the water is a constant problem, especially where leaves and bird
droppings fall on the catchment area, encouraging the growth of
colonies of algae and bacteria in the cistern.
A well is a hole that is dug, driven, or drilled in the ground to
reach a porous, subsurface, water-bearing stratum. A well usually
provides a supply of water that is more reliable, both qualitatively
and quantitatively, than a rainwater system. As the well is being
drilled, water is often found within just a few feet of the surface.
Such water has probably seeped into the ground in the immediate
neighborhood of the well and is therefore sub ject to contamination
by nearby sewage disposal systems, including a building 's own, or by
barnyards or garbage dumps in the vicinity. Deep wells usually take
their water from strata that are fed by surface water that falls to earth
tens or hundreds of miles away. The filtering action that occurs
du r ing the long horizontal passage through the stratum results in
water that is often totally free of bacteria, although it may be laden
with dissolved minerals. Most such minerals do not affect the potab-
ility or usefulness of the water. Certain calcium salts, however, can
cause the internal scaling and eventual obstruction of water pipes
and form an insoluble scum when combined with ordinary house-
hold soap. Water rich in calcium ions is known as hard water. Hard
water usually tastes good and deposits little scale in pipes as long as
it is cold. When hard water is heated, however, it becomes much
more active chemically and quickly encrusts interior surfaces of
both the water heater and the hot-water pipes with rock-hard inter-
nal deposits. In buildings served with hard water, a water softener,
which is a simple ion-exchange column, is installed on the pipe that
feeds the water heater to replace the troublesome calcium ions
with soluble sodium ions. Chemically softened water does not scale

35

5 .4

pipes, and its cleansing properties are s im i lar to those of m inera l-
free rainwater.
In an ordinary well, the water level lies some distance below the
surface of the ground. An artesian well is one that taps a stratum
pressurized by a flow of water from a higher elevation. Such a
stratum is often encountered, but the pressure is seldom high
enough to force the water all the way out the top of the well (5.4).
In either type of well, a pump must be installed to l ift the water
and force it through the building's distribution pipes. If the water
level in the well is within about 25 feet (7 m) of the surface, a pump
at ground level can create a suff ic ient vacuum in its intake pipe that
atmospheric pressure will force the water through the pipe to the
surface (5 .5 ). If the water level lies deeper, a pressure stronger than
that of the atmosphere is required, and so a pump must be lowered
permanently into the bottom of the well to force the water up the
pipe. The most common such pump is the submersible pump,
which contains a sealed electric motor capable of func t ion ing for
years without maintenance at the bottom of a well. Electric wires
run down the well from the surface of the ground to power the
pump, often for hund reds of feet (5.6).

Water Distribution Within the Building

Water requires pressure to move it through pipes. Municipal sys-
tems, as previously noted, usua l ly provide this pressure by pump ing
the water into elevated tanks. Most private water systems provide
pressure by pumping the water into a small storage tank in which
pressure is maintained by a volume of compressed air in the top of
the tank (5.7). The pump engages automatically when the pressure
falls to a predetermined minimum level and forces water into the
tank until a predetermined max imum pressure is reached. Water
driven by air pressure is always available from the bottom of the

?e

5 .5

5 .6

5 .7

tank, whether or not the pump is operating. If filtration or chlorina-
tion is required, appropriate devices are coupled in series with the
pressure tank.
Cold water is fed either from the pressure tank or from the main
water service pipe from the understreet main through a network of
supply pipes to the various outlets and fixtures inside the building
(5.8). A parallel network is usually installed to carry water that has
been heated in an insulated tank to make it more suitable for wash-
ing. The size of each pipe is determined by the rate at which it must
transport water under conditions of maximum probable demand.
Thus we find that the pipes in a supply network, treelike, tend to
become progressively smaller as we trace them farther and farther
away from the water source, toward the points of use. Water supply
piping is generally made of copper or hard plastics, which o f fer
smooth, low-friction interior surfaces and a high resistance to cor-
rosion and scaling. Zinc-coated steel pipe, once very popular and
lower in cost than copper, is very prone to scaling and is seldom used
today. Long ago, lead was used for water-supply piping, until it was
discovered that it contaminated the water with poisonous lead-based
compounds.
At each fixture, a valve is placed in each supply line so either hot
or cold water may be shut off to permit repair of the fixture without
interrupting the flow to other parts of the building. Just above each
valve, a dead-end, upright branch of pipe is provided to act as an
air chamber. The air in the chamber cushions the shock created by
the almost instantaneous deceleration to zero of the water velocity
in the pipe when a faucet is shut off. If such chambers are not pro-
vided, a banging noise known as water hammer is heard as faucets
are shut off, and momentarily high pressures are created in the
pipes, causing the possibility of damage to the system.

37

5 .8

5 .9

Hot water cools off rapidly as it sits in a pipe. In a small building,
occupants simply run the water until the cooled water is gone and hot
water emerges. Hot-water piping systems for large buildings often have
such long runs of pipe from the water heater to fixtures that this strat-
egy would be extremely wasteful of water, fue l, and occupant time.
Usually in large buildings, a return pipe to the water heater is provided
near each fixture. Water circulates up the supply pipe and back down
the return pipe to the heater to be rewarmed, with the c ircu la t ion
force furnished by either convection or a small pump (5.9). Thus hot
water is always available at each tap within one or two seconds, despite
the cooling that takes place in the pipe. Another way of circumvent-
ing the problem of cooling in the pipe is not to have a central water
heater but to provide smaller heaters at or near each point of use.
Chilled water for dr ink ing was commonly provided at one time
by a central chiller and a separate network of supply and re turn
p ip ing analogous to the hot-water system ju st described. In recent
times, however, it has become more economical and satisfactory to
chill water in small coolers at each point of use.
All water supply pipes should be therma l ly insulated. In the case
of hot or chilled water, energy is saved and water is conserved if
the water does not have to be run for a long time before it emerges
from the tap at the desired temperature. Cold and chilled water
pipes requ ire insulation jacketed by a vapor retarder, to prevent
condensate from fo rm ing on the pipes in hum id weather.
In tall buildings, municipal water pressure is often insufficient to
force water to the fixtures on the upper floors. Here, pumps must be
installed in the bu i ld ing to transport the water to the upper reaches
of the building. In some cases, these pumps feed the fixtures di-
rectly. In other cases, the pumps l i ft the water to one or more tanks
at higher levels of the bu i ld ing, from which it is fed by gravity to pipe
networks in the floor below (5.10).

Plumbing Fixtures

Lavatories, sinks, and ba th tubs are designed to catch and hold
water for washing and to drain it away after use. For cleanliness and
durability, they must be made of hard, smooth materials such as
porcelain or stainless steel, which can withstand repeated scrubbing
over a period of many years.
Toilets (properly called water closets) and u r ina ls are designed
to flush away body wastes. They are made of glazed porcelain, an
extremely smooth, hard material, to ensure that they will not accu-
mulate bacteria-harboring scratches as they are being cleaned.
Where supply piping is kept economically small, as in houses, it
is incapable of providing directly the quick, copious rush of water

5 .10

38

necessary to operate the siphon trap of the fixture, so water is slowly
accumulated for each flush in a tank at the back of the fixture. In
public buildings, flushing is so frequent that slow-filling tanks are
unequal to the demand, and thus larger water supply pipes must be
installed to flush the water closets directly. Special valves regulate
the strength and duration of each flush.

Avoiding Cross-Connections

Water pressure in supply pipes sometimes fails. It may do so because
the water ma in or pump has been shut down for servicing, because
a vehicle has broken off a fire hydrant, or because of the extreme
demands for water of fire engines as they fight a ma jor building fire.
When such fa i lures occur, the water that is in the pipes and mains
drains back away from the building, creating a suction in the pipes.
If someone has left a hose runn ing with its nozzle at the bottom of a
container, or if the water inlet to a fixture or swimming pool is below
the level of the water held in the fixture or pool, the held water will
be drawn back into the supply pipes. Such a connection between
the supply piping and a source of potentially contaminated water
is known as a cross-connection. Cross-connections are hazardous
because they can result in the ingestion of contaminated water by
large numbers of people.
Most plumbing fixtures are designed in such a way that the level
of the open water held by the fixture—the wash water in a bathroom
sink, for example, or the water in the tank or bowl of a water closet—
cannot possibly reach the level of the opening that supplies fresh
water to the fixture. A bathroom sink has an overflow port that drains
off excess water before it can reach the end of the faucet. The bowl
of a tank-type water closet may clog and fill up to its rim, but the
water inlet from the building 's supply network is safely above both
the rim of the bowl and the water level of the tank. These fixtures are
incapable of causing cross-connections. But some fixtures cannot be
designed in this way. A water closet or urinal in a public building
has a supply pipe connected directly to its rim. The end of a hose
connected to an outdoor faucet can be left in a swimming pool or
a garbage can filled with water. In each fixture where such a cross-
connection is possible, a vacuum breaker must be installed in the
supply line (5.11). Whenever the water pressure fails, the vacuum
breaker allows air to enter the line and destroy the siphoning action,
thus preventing contaminated water from being sucked into the
system. The familiar chrome-plated flush valve on every public
toilet fixture contains a vacuum breaker, and appropriate vacuum
breakers are manufactured for outdoor faucets, swimming-pool
piping, irrigation piping, and other fixtures as well.

39

5 .11

5 .12

Providing Space for Water Pipes

Water supply piping occupies space. Small wood-frame bu i ld ings
often have enough space inside floors and walls to accommodate
it. But the walls of buildings with large numbe rs of fixtures cannot
hold all the pipes, and so special pipe chases, both vertical and
horizontal, must be provided as a part of the building 's basic design.
Such chases are often bu i lt with access doors to allow occasional
change and ma in tenance of the pipes without d isrup t ing the fabr ic
of the bu i ld ing (5.12).
In cold climates, water supply pipes must be kept from freezing to
protect them from bursting due to the expansion of water as it turns
to ice. Water mains and service pipes are bur ied below the level to
wh ich the soil freezes in winter. Ne i ther p lumb ing chases nor walls
containing water p ip ing should be located at the outside perimeter
of a building, because in such locations they may be subjected to
subfreez ing temperatures. If exterior wall locations are inevitable,
care must be taken to place all the thermal insulation in the wall
outside of the piping. This ensures that the piping will never be
more than a few degrees colder than the air inside the building.
Merely insulating the pipes themselves will not keep them from
freezing if water stands still in the pipes for an extended time. This
is because the surface area of the pipes is very large with respect to
the volume of water that they contain. The water in the pipes cools
rapidly just because of the huge exposed surface area, even if all the
surfaces are covered with insulation.

Bottled Water vs. Tap Water

Most mun ic ipal water and well-water from private systems in North
America are suff ic ien t ly pure for dr ink ing and taste good. Neverthe-
less, in a m a jor t r iumph of advertising over truth, many people have
been persuaded that they should drink only commercially bottled
spring water that is sold at prices that are often higher than those of
soft drinks or dairy products. Never mind that some of it is shipped
ha lfway around the world and that it is put up in woefully small
containers that constitute an unconscionable waste of material and
fuel: bottled water, especially if it comes from a foreign source in an
exotic bottle, is stylish and makes its consumers feel good, even
though in most cases it is no better in taste and purity than tap water.

Further Reading

Ben jam in Stein and John Reynolds. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment 
Buildings (gth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2000, pp. 531-667.

for

40

6

Recycling Wastes

Nature works in closed cycles. What is waste to one organism is food
to another, in an endless, intricately interwoven web that ultimately
wastes nothing at all except small amounts of renewable energy from
the sun. In the wild, an army of insects and microorganisms feed
on the excrement and corpses of higher animals, reducing these
wastes to soil nutrients that can be utilized by plants. Dead vegetable
matter of all types is similarly attacked, broken down, and used
again as plant food. In the soil, in the water, and in the air, processes
take place continually to ensure that none of Nature 's valuable
substances is ever left in an unproductive state.
In many agrarian societies, fa rm families participate actively in
these cycles. They mix their animal and vegetable wastes together in
piles or bins and compost them by allowing earthworms and a host
of bacteria to convert them to rich soil. In the soil, energized by sun-
light and watered by rainfall, plants grow to feed the fam i ly and its
animals and to fu rn i sh fuel for cooking and heating. The animals
provide both food and clothing. The ashes from the spent fuel and
the excrement of the animals go back into the soil, replenishing its
nutrient content. The land's fertility decreases little over the family's
lifetime, if at all.
Even some small, primitive towns are capable of sustaining this
sort of relationship to the land. Food scraps and human excrement
are carefully gathered and transported by "night soil" collectors to
the outskirts of town, where farmers mix them with vegetable wastes
and allow them to compost. Then they add the compost to the soil
to help it produce food (6.1). If adequate composting practices are
employed, the wastes are free of ha rm ful organisms by the time
they reach the soil, and diseases will not be communicated through
the cycle. Both the health of the community and the richness of its
agriculture are maintained.

41

6 .1

Unfortunately, it is d iff icu lt to ensure that adequate composting
practices are always employed, and careless hand l ing of night soil
has caused disastrous epidemics and plagues throughout history.
Most cities do not compost the ir wastes because most are not fed in
any large degree by the farms in the immediate vicinity; the ir wastes
would have to be transported considerable distances for agrarian
recycling. Thus we have broken the na tu ral cha in of recycling. We
expend half our u rban water consumption in flushing garbage and
excrement from our buildings and then mix this half with the half
we have used for washing and other purposes. This is marvelously
convenient and keeps our bu i ld ings free of disease and odor, but it
creates new problems. The water that the municipality ju st brought
to the town at such trouble and expense, sparkling clean and
bacteria f ree, is now sewage. It is thoroughly contaminated with odor
and potential disease and presents an enormous disposal problem.

Sewage Systems in Buildings

As a part of its own metabolic process, a bu i ld ing must give off its
liquid wastes. It is worthwhile to examine both how this is currently
done and how buildings might con tr ibu te to a more sound system of
waste recycling.
Liquid wastes are conducted from sinks, lavatories, tubs, showers,
water closets, urinals, and floor drains through a network of waste
pipes that is drained by gravity (6.2). In order to maintain gravity
flow, relatively large-diameter pipes are necessary as compared
with the small diameters that are used for pressurized water supply
pipes. All waste pipes must run consistently downhill. Normal
atmospheric air pressure must be ma in ta ined in all sections of the
network at all times to avoid the accumu la t ion of higher pressures
in some parts of the network that might block flow. Furthermore,
because the waste piping handles suspended solid wastes of various
kinds, it is prone to clogging, and so access to the pipes must be
provided at f requent intervals to allow for cleaning.
A fixture such as a lavatory, sink, or tub empties into the waste pip-
ing network through a trap, a U-shaped piece of pipe that retains
enough water to act as a seal that prevents the odors and gases of
decomposition from the waste piping from passing back through the
fixture and into the bu i ld ing (6.3). The water seal in the trap can be
broken, however, if waste water from the fixture siphons through the
trap or if gas pressure or air pressure bu i lds up in the piping. For this
reason, a vent pipe is attached to the waste p ip ing a short distance
downstream from each trap. The vent allows air to enter the waste
pipe to break any potential siphoning action, and it releases to the
atmosphere any decomposition gases such as methane or hydrogen

42

6 .2

6 .3

sulfide. Thus a complete network of waste piping for a bu i ld ing
includes two treelike configurations, one that collects the sewage
and leads it downward and another, upside down, that allows air
to enter the first tree at the tips of its branches. The piping in each
tree grows steadily larger from fixture to outlet, to serve the greater
number of fixtures at each stage.
The contemporary water closet is simply a large trap that is forced
to siphon rapidly du r ing the flushing process so as to transport solid
wastes. After flushing, the bowl refills automatically with fresh water
to ma in ta in its seal against the entry of sewer gases (6.4). Like any
other trap, it must be vented nearby, to prevent accidental siphoning
between flushes.
Most new water closets are designed to use less than half as much
water per flush as do older water closets. Many areas of the United
States permit only this type of toilet in new installations. There are
even more water-efficient options available, however: A toilet with a
mechanical seal rather than a water trap uses only about 5 percent
of the ordinary amount, and a toilet using recirculating chemicals
is even more efficient than this. Several types generate no sewage
at all. One such type incinerates the excrement with a gas flame
or electric element after each use, leaving only a bit of clean ash.
Another type is a much-improved version of the traditional out-
house, ventilated in such a way that it can be maintained odor

43

6 .4

free inside the house and configured internally so it continuously
reduces both excrement and kitchen garbage to a small volume of
disease-free garden compost. Such a device may offer one small-
scale way of mend ing a part of the break in the nu tr ient cha in.

Municipal Sewage Disposal

Some towns (as did nearly all not so long ago) do nothing to
treat their sewage. They simply discharge it, bacteria and all, into a
nearby river, lake, or ocean. But most towns nowadays carry out at
least primary treatment of their sewage in a sewage treatment plant.
They hold the sewage for a time in tanks where the solid material,
the sludge, settles to the bottom. The l iqu id in the top of the tank is
chlorinated to kill bacteria and then dumped into a local waterway.
The sludge is pumped into another tank where it is allowed to fer-
ment anaerobically for several weeks. This fermentation kills most
of the disease-causing bacteria in the sludge and precipitates out
most of the minerals it contains. Then this "digested" sludge is also
chlorinated and pumped into a waterway (6.5).
Through this process, soil nu t r ien t s—b rought into the city as
fru i ts, vegetables, grains, milk products, and meats and flushed
out of the city as sewage—a re now deposited not back into the soil,
but into waterways. Unlike the soil, which needs the nutrients and is
capable through na tural processes of finishing their reconversion
into food, the waterways cannot complete the cycle. Instead, the
increased nu tr ient content of the water accelerates the growth of
waterweeds and algae. Soon the water is choked with plant growth
so dense that sunlight can no longer penetrate more than a few
inches into the water. Masses of plants die and decay. The decay
process consumes much of the oxygen dissolved in the water. Fish
suffocate in the oxygen-poor environment, and the waterway itself
begins to die. Over a few decades it fills with dead plants and even-
tually becomes a swamp and then a meadow. By that time, of course,
no one remembers that people once swam, boated, and fished there.
In the meantime, food-producing fa rm land is gradually dra ined of
its nutrients. Farm productivity falls, and such plants as are grown
there may lack essential human nu tr ien ts. Ar t if ic ial fer t i l izers must
then be applied to the soil to replace the wasted natural fertilizers
that are destroying lakes and rivers instead of replenishing the soil.
Many mun ic ipal sewage treatment plants are improving the
efficacy of their treatment processes, using aerobic digestion and
various sorts of chemical treatment and filtration to produce, in
some cases, an e f f luent that is suitable for dr ink ing. In some cities,
clean eff luent is pumped into the ground to replenish depleted
water-bearing strata. In most cases, the nutrients still end up in a

44

6.5

river or ocean. A few cities have taken steps to try to recover and use
the nutrients. Some dry the processed sludge, bag it, and sell it as
agricultural fertilizer. Unfortunately, most sewage contains poisons
that are unaffected by treatment processes: heavy metals such as
cadm ium and mercury, along with various organic compounds.
These have raised serious questions about the advisability of utiliz-
ing sludge as fer t i l izer. Other cities sub ject the eff luent from their
sewage treatment plants to bioremediation, passing it through ponds
in which selected aquatic plants feed on the nutrients and absorb
heavy metals and other poisons. In some locations, processed
sewage is used to fertilize forests.

On-site Sewage Disposal Systems

Buildings that lie beyond the reach of metropolitan sewers must
treat and dispose of their own sewage. This was formerly accom-
plished through the use of a cesspool, a porous underground con-
tainer of stone or brick that allowed the sewage to seep into the
surround ing soil. The cesspool was unsatisfactory, however, in that
it did nothing to remove disease-causing organisms from the sewage,
and it clogged the surround ing soil with solids in a relatively short
period of time, after which it was likely to overflow onto the surface
of the ground and cause sewage to back up into fixtures inside the
building. Its much more satisfactory successor is the nonporous
septic tank (6.6). The septic tank is configured in such a way that it
holds sewage for a period of days, allowing it to decompose anaer-
obically and to separate into a clear, relatively harmless liquid
effluent and a small amount of solid mineral matter, which settles to
the bottom. The e f f luent runs out of the tank and into a leaching
field, a system of porous pipes or porous tanks, from which it is
allowed to seep into the soil (6.7). The sludge from the bottom of the
tank must be pumped out every few years, to be hauled away and
processed into harmlessness at a remote treatment plant.
A septic tank and leaching field may malfunction and contamin-
ate the water or soil. This can happen for any of several reasons:
Perhaps the septic tank is too small for the building it serves. Perhaps
the soil in the leaching field is not sufficiently porous or the system
is installed too near a well, a body of water, or a steep slope. To guard
against such failures, most municipalities and states have stringent
regulations requiring soil testing and the utilization of approved
techniques of design and construction in the installation of septic
systems. It is not uncommon for a potential building site to prove
incapable of accommodating a septic system and therefore to be
incapable of supporting a building. This can happen if the soil is too
impervious to water, the site is too small to contain a sufficient size

45

6 .6

6 .7

of leaching field, or the water in the ground is at so high a level that
it would mingle with the e f f luent and become contaminated.
In an effort to improve small sewage disposal systems, new devices
are being introduced into the market each year. Some aim to improve
the digestion of sewage in the tank through such expedients as aerat-
ing the sewage to encourage the more thorough digestive action of
aerobic organisms. Others attempt to improve the leaching process
by distributing the e f f luent more evenly throughout the field or by
allowing access to the leaching surfaces for inspection and cleaning.
As water becomes a more precious resource, we are seeing more
buildings with systems for separating discarded wash water from
toilet wastes. After a m in imum of filtration within the building,
wash water can serve such secondary uses as the flushing of toilets or
the watering of lawns and gardens. Much of the heat from warm
waste water could be recovered through a heat exchanger to preheat
fresh water before it enters the water heater or to contribute to the
comfort heating of the building.
Anaerobic digestion of excrement and vegetable wastes produces
methane gas, potentially valuable as a fue l, as a natural by-product.
Such insignificant quantities of methane are developed 
from
domestic sewage that it is not worthwhile to build a gas-generating
apparatus for home use, but for large-scale fa rme rs and operators of
large sewage treatment plants, the possibilities are much greater.
Many municipal treatment plants are at present heated, i l lum in-
ated, and powered by methane gas from their digesters, and some
farmers have the ir own methane-generation systems.

Solid Waste Disposal

Our society also produces enormous quantities of solid wastes,
which create d ifferent sorts of problems. Paper, plastics, glass, and
metals enter our buildings, bearing informa t ion and containing
goods of various sorts. These substances are soon discarded, along
with ashes and cinders, dust and dirt, broken or worn appliances,
kitchen garbage, old clothing, industrial by-products, spent batter-
ies, used motor oil, and radioactive and chemical wastes from lab-
oratories and industries (6.8). Hund reds of pounds per person per
year of these solid wastes are produced in the United States. Nearly
all this material represents either potential links in biological recy-
cling chains (such as food scraps or paper) or finite quantities of
nonrenewable resources (such as metals and plastics). Many of the
waste substances contain useful energy, and many can be recovered
and reused, but the separation and recycling of this mingled refuse
is a huge, almost impossible task. Many cities simply burn the mass
and bury the ashes in a landf i ll or bury the mass without bu rn ing

46

6 .8

it. The buried organic materials decompose in the soil, giving off
substantial quantities of combustible gases such as methane and
ammonia. Glass, metals, and plastics simply sit in the soil, wasted.
Most cities in the United States have run out of suitable landfill
sites, and legal restrictions have made landfill an increasingly
unattractive way of disposing of solid waste in any case. The wastes
are taken instead to large incineration plants where they are burned.
This vastly reduces the volume of waste to be buried. The plants
must be carefully designed, constructed, and operated so that they
do not contribute to air pollution. Abandoned landfill sites, most of
them having become small mountains, are capped with a thick layer
of soil. Vent pipes are installed to allow gases of decomposition
to escape. In some cases, useful quantities of combustible gas are
collected by a network of pipes and used for heating of municipal
buildings. The sites are often tu rned into parks or golf courses.
An increasing number of mun ic ipa l i t ies operate recycling pro-
grams to recover waste materials such as paper, cardboard, glass, and
plastics that can be reprocessed into new products. These programs
generally depend on building owners to sort the recyclable materials
and segregate them from nonrecyclable wastes, thus avoiding the
need for complicated central sorting plants. This means, however,
that each house or bu i ld ing needs separate, clearly labeled storage
containers for garbage, clean paper, steel, a lum inum, glass, and vari-
ous types of plastics. The solid waste disposal system of the building
can no longer be a garbage can or two in a leftover corner but,
rather, must be carefully planned and constructed for its purpose.
Such programs often result in a reduction of half to two-thirds in the
volume of solid waste that must be incinerated. They also save sub-
stantial quantities of energy and materials that would otherwise be
lost. Some cities utilize the heat of combustion of their rubbish to
fuel electric power plants or central heating installations. Others
have systems for the automatic reclamation of valuable constituents
of rubbish, through either mechanized sorting or pyrolysis. Some
cities are even able to extract useful quantities of methane from their
old garbage dumps by drilling wells to tap underground pockets of
decomposition gases.
Garbage and trash are most commonly collected by hand within
buildings, to be transported to containers where they are left for
periodic removal by municipal or private trucks. Some buildings have
incinerator systems, in which wastes are jettisoned down a chute,
to be consumed by a gas- or oil-fueled fire at the bottom. Only the
ashes need then be carried away, but the air pollution generated by
incomplete combustion in fau l ty incinerators has caused their use
to be strictly regulated in many areas. Garbage grinders macer-
ate and flush food scraps into the sewage system, but the sewage

47

disposal installation, whether mun ic ipal or private, must be suffici-
ently large to handle this additional burden of water and solid material.
In some buildings, the laborious manual transport of solid wastes
has been largely eliminated through the installation of systems of
very large vacuum pipes that suck all the wastes to a central location
for incineration or for compression into bales for easier trucking.

Further Reading

Ben jam in Stein and John Reynolds. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for
Buildings (gth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2000, pp. 669-745.

48

7

Providing? r
or Thermal
Comiort

In chapter 2, we discussed the ingenious physiological mechanisms
the human body employs to achieve thermal equilibrium. However,
these mechanisms can't cope with the extreme range of temper-
atures in which we live. To achieve thermal comfort, we must rely
on clothing and buildings.
Clothing and buildings are similar in that both use passive
devices to control natural flows of heat, air, and moisture vapor for
the increased comfort of the wearer or occupant (7.1). They d i f fer in
two important respects: First, buildings enclose a volume many
times as large as that contained by clothing, in order to house not
only the bodies of the occupants but also all the space occupied
and traversed in the course of their activities. Second, buildings
are usually equipped to take an active as well as a passive role in
creating thermal comfort, through the controlled release of energy
to create a more favorable indoor climate.
We often characterize the active thermal comfort control systems
in buildings as "heating" systems or "cooling" systems. Except in rare
cases, however, a "heating" system does not create an overall net flow
of heat into the human body but merely ad jus ts the thermal charac-
teristics of the indoor environment to reduce the rate of heat loss
from the body to a comfortable level. A "cooling" or "air-conditioning"
system increases the rate of the body's heat loss in hot weather.
Though for the sake of convenience, we will continue to talk of
heating and cooling systems in buildings, as a matter of strict
accuracy it should be remembered that both heating and cooling
systems are designed to control the rate at which the body is cooled.
The accompanying chart (7.2) shows the alternative means
normally available for the voluntary regulation of human thermal
comfort. It is divided horizontally into two ma jor sections, one

49

7 .1

Physical
Activity

•Extend body
to maximize
surface area

•Reduce
level of
muscular
activity

Clothing

Radiation

•Open or re-
move layers
of clothing
• Saturate
clothing with

WcrhAr

• Liquid-cooled
space suit

•Shade body
from warm
object
•Expose
body to
cooler ob-
ject
•Mechanically
cool building
surfaces

Air

Temperature
•Keep sun
from heating
occupied space
•Use thermal
mass to cool air
•Evaporate HjQ
to cool air
•Mechanically
refrigerate
air

Mumidity

Air Movement

•Dehumidify
air by con-
densing water
onto cool
building
surfaces

-Allow wind or
convection
currents to
move past
body

•Mechanical
dehumidifi-
cation

• Use fan to
move air

.contract body
to minimize
surface area

•Close or put
on layers of
clothing
-Dry out Wet
clothing

• Electric
blantet
• Electric
stockings

• Raise
level of
muscular
activity
•Snuggle with
a friend

•Allow sun to
heat occupied
space
• Use thermal
mass to release
stored heat
into air
• Heat the

air

•Expose body
to warm
object
•Reflect bode
body heat
with metallic
surface

•Mechanically

warm building
surfaces
•Build fine

• Allow sun
to evaporate
water into
air

•Shelter
body from
wind

• Boil water
into air

•Reduce
fan speed

Surface
Contact
•put ooay
against cool,
dense surface
•Keep body
off warm or
insulating
surfaces
•TaKe a cool
bath or swim
• Ingest cool
food or drink
-Mechanically
cool floors
and/or seats
•Put body
against warm
or insulating
surfaces

•Hot bath

U/rf \AMfoK fviK

Llasvt- •£ l/-v~*t

tlp nr rvtf IrirJt
•Heat HOOTS
and/or seats
•Ingest hot
food or drink.

Voluntary Means for Regulating Thermal Comfort
7.2

7 .2

containing means for cooling the body more rap id ly and the other
for cooling the body less rapidly. Each m a jor section of the chart is
again divided into two horizontal subsections, one for passive
means, those that do not requ ire the ar t if ic ial release of energy, and
one for active means, those that do.
The first two vertical co lumns indicate the roles of physical activ-
ity and clothing. The remaining columns list means of regulating
thermal comfort that may be employed in or around buildings, most
often by the bu i ld ings themselves. These means will be explained
more fu l ly in the following four chapters, but note that five separate
f a c to r s— th e rm al radiation, air tempera ture, hum id i ty, air move-
ment, and the thermal properties of surfaces contacted by the
body— a re involved in creating thermal comfort (7.3).
In a building, these five factors are heavily interdependent. When
a floor surface is warmed by the sun, it warms the air above itself,

5°

7 .3

radiates heat to the human body, and conducts heat to the human
foot that contacts it (7.4). The warmed air rises above the surround-
ing air, creating a convective circulation, and the air's relative
humidity is reduced as its temperature is raised. Thus a single
occu r rence— the warming of a floor by a shaft of sun l igh t—can affect
all the factors bearing on thermal comfort. Similarly, an ord inary
warm-air heating system heats the air, reduces its relative hum id i ty,
blows it past the occupants of a room, and warms the surfaces of the
room by sweeping them with warm a ir. It is impossible to change
any one factor without affecting the others in some degree.
Besides this interdependence, there is also considerable inter-
changeability among these means of thermal comfort regulation. As
can be seen in the chart, two sorts of interchangeability are possible:
One is between the columns in the chart. We can be quite com-
fortable in a room in which the air temperature is relatively low, for
example, if there is a crackling fire radiating generous amounts of
heat from the fireplace to the skin (7.5). Summer air temperatures in
the high eighties (3O°C-32°C) will seem ideal if the hum id i ty is low,
a moderate breeze is blowing, only light clothing is worn, and one is
shielded from direct sunlight (7.6). There are limits to this sort of inter-
changeability, but w i th in a rather wide latitude, one parameter may
be adjusted to compensate for another without causing discomfort.
A second sort of interchangeability is between horizontal rows in
the chart, between active and passive means of varying the same
parameter of thermal comfort. A breeze passing through a room can
substitute for an electric fan (7.7). A thick rug over a concrete floor
may eliminate the need to warm the floor with circulating hot water
(7.8). When passive means can be used in place of active ones, fuel
consumption in the building is reduced. Long-term cost savings are
likely, depending on the relative costs of installing and ma in ta in ing
the passive and active devices.
People vary a good deal with respect to such important thermal
factors as metabolic rate, tendency to perspire, amount of insulating
fat beneath the skin, ratio of skin surface area to body volume, and

7 .7

51

7 .4

7 .5

7 .6

7 .8

amount of clothing worn. Additionally, the same person in the same
clothing has d ifferent thermal requ iremen ts at d i f fe rent times of
day, as when exercising more vigorously, digesting a heavy meal, or
sleeping. As a result of all these variables, each person in a room is
likely to have a slightly d i f fe rent opinion about what set of thermal
conditions feels most comfortable. In general, the best that can be
done is to seek those conditions that satisfy the greatest number of
people and to allow the rest to ad ju st their clothing in order to com-
pensate. In some circumstances in which people rema in in one
place for an extended period, as on an a irp lane, in a theater, or in an
office or workshop, it is possible to give each person control over at
least one thermal factor, by such means as ind iv idual air vents, small
operable windows, or small electric heaters. In other circumstances,
especially in dwellings, one has freedom to move a little far ther from
the fire, or to sit in a sunny window wh i le others sit in the shade
fa r ther back in the room. If the designer of a bu i ld ing takes care to
provide such opportunities for ind iv idual ad jus tmen t, there can be
many of them.

Further Reading

Victor Olgyay. Design with Climate. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press,
*973> PP- H-23-

52

8

Thermal Properties or
Building Components

Each material used in building construction has its own un ique set
of physical properties relative to the flow of heat. An important part
of a designer's job is to select and combine bu i ld ing materials in
such a way as to result in a bu i ld ing whose enclosure performs as
much of the building's climate-control func t ion as possible, leaving
as little work as possible to be done by energy-consuming heating
and cooling systems.
We must distinguish clearly among the three basic mechanisms
of heat transfer. Radiation is a transfer of heat by means of electro-
magnetic waves that pass through space or air from a warmer object
to a cooler one (8.1). The skin is warmed by radiation when one
stands in the sun or near a fire and is cooled by radiation when one
stands near a cold wall or under a clear night sky. Conduction is a
flow of heat through solid material (8.2). Heat is conducted to or
from the skin when the skin is pressed against a warmer or cooler
object, such as a hot potato or an ice cube. Convection is a transfer
of heat by means of a moving stream of air or water that is heated
by a warmer object and then gives up heat to a cooler one (8.3). The
skin is warmed or cooled convectively by exposure to warm or cool
air. A common kitchen stove employs all three mechanisms of heat
transfer: the broiler warms food primarily by radiation, the oven
pr imar i ly by convection, and the burners primarily by conduction
through the metal of the pan.

Radiation

All objects give off heat in the form of electromagnetic radiation,
and all receive heat by radiation from surround ing objects. A source
at a very high temperature, such as the sun, radiates much of its heat

53

8 .1

8 .2

8 .3

8 .4

8 .5

Solar 
Radiation

t

Terrestrial
Radiation

AbSOTp. rvr, t

Emitt. Ketlect

0.05 0.^5

0.25 0.75

0.1O O.IO

O.<?0 0.10

0.30 

o.w 

0-10

o.\o

O.°l0 O.io

O.^O O.IO

S£«h*

0.05 
035
0.25 0.75
0.20 
0.60

0.12 
0.66
0.4O 0.60
0.70 0.30

0.85 O.|5
0.60 O.^O

Bright aluminum
Galvanized steel

White paint
Fresh whitewash

It. green paint
Dfc.green paint
blade paint

Concrete

8 .6

as visible light. Warm sources on the earth are not nearly as hot
as the sun and radiate mainly in the in f ra red range. Infrared (pro-
nounced infra-red, mean ing "beyond red") rays are an invisible part
of the light spectrum and behave exactly like visible light. Any two
objects that can "see" each other through a med ium that is trans-
parent to light, such as air or a vacuum, exchange radiant energy.
When line-of-sight contact between the two objects is blocked, as by
the insertion anyplace between them of an opaque ob ject such as
a sheet of paper, the exchange stops instantly. This is what happens
when you step into the shade of a tree on a sunny day.
The net rate of heat exchange by radiation between two objects
is proportional to the d i f fe rence between the four th powers of their
absolute temperatures. Thus two objects at the same temperature
have no net exchange of heat. If one object is a few degrees warmer,
there will be a relatively small flow of heat from the warmer object
to the cooler one. As the d ifference in temperature between the two
objects grows, the rad iant flow grows at an increasingly rapid rate.
The radiative properties of bu i ld ing ma te r ia l s— the ways in which
they affect thermal radiation that impinges on t h em— a re of extreme
importance to designers. Reflectance is the proportion of incoming
radiation that bounces off a material, leaving the temperature of the
material unchanged. Absorptance is the proportion that enters a
material and thereby raises its temperature (8.4). The sum of reflect-
ance and absorptance for a given material is always one. Emittance
is a measure of a material's ability to radiate heat outward to other
objects. At any given wavelength emittance is numer ica l ly identical
to absorptance (8.5).
The range of electromagnetic wavelengths is quite large, and
we find that buildings must commonly deal with thermal radiation
in two distinctly d i f fe rent parts of the spectrum. Solar rad ia t ion,
emitted by a source at a tempera ture of many thousands of degrees,
is composed of relatively short wavelengths. Thermal rad ia t ion from
most terrestrial sou rces—sun -wa rmed earth or floors, warm building
surfaces, hum an s k i n— is emitted at much lower temperatures and
therefore at much longer wavelengths. Most common bu i ld ing
materials react quite d i f fe ren t ly to these two ranges of wavelengths,
and these differences account for several interesting thermal phenom-
ena. From the accompanying chart (8.6), we note, for example,
that a bu i ld ing painted white reflects about 80 percent of the sun's
direct thermal rad ia t ion. However, it reflects only about 10 percent
of the thermal radiation from surround ing sun-heated lawns and
pavement, almost the same as if it were painted black. If the build-
ing had a br ight metallic exterior, it would be much better protected
against this terrestrial reradiation of solar heat. It would also radiate
less heat to the outdoors in winter than if it were painted white. This

54

low emittance of polished metals at long wavelengths is of particular
use in building construction, because it allows us to use bright metal
foils as thermal insulators in walls or roofs, provided that we install
them ad jacent to an airspace. A material can emit or reflect radi-
ation only through a gas that is transparent to the wavelengths of the
radiation or through a vacuum. If a metal foil is sandwiched snugly
between other layers of construction, it cannot reflect radiation but
can only conduct heat directly. Because metal foils are excellent
conductors of heat, it follows that they are valuable as insulation
only when they have an ad jacent airspace on one side or the other,
or preferably both.

Conduction

The resistance of a material to the conduction of heat is a measure
of its insulating value. The rate at which a bu i ld ing gains or loses
heat through any portion of its enclosure under stable indoor and
outdoor temperatures is directly proportional to the d ifference in air
temperature between the inside and the outside of the enclosure
and inversely proportional to the overall thermal resistance of that
portion of its enclosure. In general, we try to build walls, roofs, and
floors so that they have maximum possible thermal resistance, both
for bodily comfort and for conservation of energy. Solid materials
have varying resistances (8.7). Metals have very low resistance
(which is the same as saying that they are good conductors of heat,
or poor thermal insulators), whereas masonry materials have mod-
erately low resistance, and wood has moderately high resistance.
Roughly speaking, the thermal resistances of materials are inversely
proportional to their densities.
The best resistor of heat flow that is commonly available for use in
buildings is air, provided that it can be kept from moving. If we trap
the air layer within the hollow wall of an ordinary wood-frame house
in a loose tangle of glass or mineral fibers which prevent it from
circulating, it will have a very high thermal resistance. The fibers,
spun from a dense material, are themselves rather poor resistors to
heat flow. Their function is simply to create so much resistance to
circulation of the air they have trapped that the air remains still and
acts as a good insulator. If the same air is allowed to circulate freely
within the wall, it will set up a pattern of convective flow that trans-
fers heat from the warmer surface to the cooler one with surprising
efficiency (8.8).
Because window glass has a notoriously low resistance to the flow
of heat, most windows are made with double or triple glazing, in
which air is trapped in thin layers between sheets of glass. The visual
qualities of the glass are not noticeably d ifferent from those of a

55

Thermal Resistances, R
ft2hr°F 
~BTU

O.O007

1.25

O.8O

I" (25 mm) aluminum
I" (25 mm) pine
4"0oo mm) bncK
dtt(zoo mm) concrete
3^"C9o mm) glass fiber batt 10.9
6^150 mm) glass fiber batt I0.&
l"(25mm) polystyrene foam 4.2
i" (25 mm) polyurethane foam 5.9
Single glass 
0.9

O.6&

Double glass 
Triple glass 
Well-insulated wall 

I.&
2.6
15.0-19.0

mz°C

W

0.0OOIZ

0.23

O.I4

O.I6

1.96

3.35

0.76

1.06
O.I6
O.32
O.5O
2.7-3.4

5.7

8.8

single sheet of glass, but the thermal resistance is greatly increased,
though not to a value approaching that of a well-insulated wall. In
an effort to increase the resistance of double glazing, manufac turers
have tried progressively increasing the thickness of the air layer
between the panes. What they have discovered is that thermal resis-
tance increases slightly as the layer is thickened to an inch or so and
then fa i ls to increase fu r ther as the dimension is fu r ther increased.
What happens is that when the airspace is very thin, friction
between the glass surfaces and the trapped air prevents much of the
convective flow that would readily transfer heat from one pane to
the other, but the very thinness of the air layer prevents it from
having a very high resistance. When the air layer is very thick, it
could in theory provide a great deal of resistance, except that the air
is given enough space to circulate with relative ease. A max imum
overall resistance can therefore be achieved with an air layer of
intermediate thickness (8.9). Resistance can be increased somewhat
by substituting a gas of lower thermal capacity for the air between
the panes or by in t roduc ing tangled glass fibers into the airspace.
Glass fibers affect the optical quality of the window, however, and so
cannot be used where a view is desired. They also reduce the amount
of light transmitted, fo rc ing the designer to select an optimum
compromise between thermal resistance and light transmission.
The resistance of an open airspace is also affected by the emit-
tances of the surfaces on either side. Much of the heat that travels
across an airspace is radiated directly from one surface to the other,
independently of the convective transfer of the air itself. Thus a layer
of bright, nonoxidizing metal fo i l, usua l ly a lum inum, w i th in or on
either side of the airspace, can eliminate most of the radiative trans-
fer. In double glazing, thin metallic coatings can be deposited on
the surfaces of the glass fac ing the airspace, to reduce the emittance
of the glass. These low emissivity (low-e) coatings thereby reduce the
conductivity of the entire assembly. Double glazing with a low-e
coating is as effective in slowing the transmission of heat as triple
glazing without the coating.
The insulating effectiveness of an airspace or insulating material
is also dependent on the position of the assembly and the direction
in which the heat flows. In a wall or window, as we have noted, heat
flow is horizontal and is abetted by a vertical convective circulation
of air. In a roof, heat flows upward in cold weather, and warm air
within the roof assembly rises immediately to the cold upper surface
to give up its heat, a relatively (and unfor tuna te ly) e f f ic ient process
(8.10). In hot weather, however, the heat flow through the roof is
reversed. Air warmed by the hot upper surface tends to remain
stratified against that surface ra ther than circulate toward the cooler
surface below, and the heat transfer through the roof is relatively

56

8.9

8.10

sluggish (8.11). Thus if identical airspaces are provided in the floor,
wall, and roof assemblies of a building, convective heat transfer in
the winter will be most rapid in the roof, least rapid in the floor, and
of intermediate rapidity in the walls. Radiative heat transfer, by con-
trast, is independent of direction. A reflective foil surface eliminates
about half the total outward heat flow through roofs and walls and
about two-thirds of the downward flow through floors. Reflective foil
attached to the rafters of a house with an airspace above it reduces
substantially the downward transmission of heat from a sun-warmed
roof into a bu i ld ing in summer. This keeps the attic cooler and
reduces the amount of heat that must be removed from the house by
a cooling system.
Air serves a small but significant insulating role on the exterior
and interior surfaces of buildings. Every surface holds a thin surface
film of air by means of fr ic t ion between the air and the surface.
The rougher the surface is, the thicker the film and the higher its
insulating value will be (8.12). Fur is a very rough surface that traps
a considerable thickness of air; its insulating properties are widely
appreciated. Surface films are seriously affected by air movement,
however. Exterior films are wiped away by high winds, thus account-
ing for part of the fuel-saving qualities of wind-sheltered bu i ld ing
locations. (The other part of the savings comes from the reduced
infiltration of cold outside air through cracks in the building .)
Convective heat transfer through a surface film is roughly propor-
tional to the cube root of the air velocity past the surface. Expected
heat losses from buildings are computed on the basis of max imum
prevailing wind velocities in the area.
Walls and roofs of buildings do not usually have un i fo rm thermal
resistances across their surfaces, owing to the presence of thermal
bridges, which are fram ing members and other components
that transmit heat more rapidly than the insulated parts of the
assemblies. This is not too severe a problem in wood construction,
because wood is itself a fairly good insulator, but metal and masonry
construction are often filled with such thermal bridges, which can
greatly increase the heat loss through an otherwise-well-insulated
assembly (8.13). In existing walls or ceilings, the presence of thermal
bridges can often be detected by pattern staining, in which cooler
areas of the interior surface collect a thicker layer of dust because
of the higher electrostatic charge that they carry. In old houses, one
frequently sees horizontal stripes on the insides of exterior walls.
These occur between the strips of wood lath to which the plaster was
applied. The plaster that oozed between the strips of lath conducts
heat much more quickly than the plaster that has wood behind it.
In cold weather, condensate or frost can form on the portions of
interior surfaces cooled by thermal bridges.

8.11

Thermal Resistances, R,
of Surface Air Films

ftVF rrf'C
BTU W
Interior wall surface 
0.68 
0.12.
Exterior surface, summer wind 0.25 0.05
Exterior surfacey winter wind O.I 7 0.05
8.12
5.12

57

8.13

New approaches to reduc ing the conduction of heat through
exterior bu i ld ing assemblies are gradually coming out of the lab-
oratory and into use. Cloud gel is a fluffy, stable material that is the
lowest density solid substance created by man. It works much like
glass fiber insu la t ion, but it is a much more effective insulator. It is
very fragile and must be protected from physical damage, which
limits its use to situations in which it is sandwiched between rigid
layers that protect it. One such situation is double glazing: Cloud
gel between two sheets of glass produces a window with very high
resistance to the flow of heat. The gel is so insubstantial that the
window appears to be clear glass.
Sheets of glass or metal with a vacuum between them form an
excellent insulating assembly. If the interior surfaces have reflective
metal coatings, like the interior surfaces of a glass vacuum bottle
that is used to carry hot or cold dr inks ("Thermos" is one brand of
vacuum bottle), heat flow is almost totally blocked. The d iff icu l ty is
that a vacuum causes atmospheric pressure to exert a tremendous
force on the sheets of material that contain the vacuum. Flat sheets
must be held apart by rigid spacers at close intervals, and these
spacers act as thermal bridges. Fur thermore, even the tiniest leak
will allow air to enter and destroy the vacuum.
Some designers and bu i lders have experimented with double-skin
or double-envelope buildings that have two independent, insulated
layers of exterior walls and roofs, like one bu i ld ing built inside another
with an airspace between (8.14). In some instances, the space between
the layers is heated in cold weather and ventilated or cooled in hot
weather. These buildings produce impressive levels of thermal com-
fort, but their economy is open to question. Construction costs for
walls and roofs are nearly doubled. Floor areas are substantially larger,
too: A house 24 feet by 50 feet in plan has a floor area of 1,200 square
feet (7.3 m by 16.2 m with an area of 111 square meters). If a foot
and a half is added to the thickness of each wall to create a double
envelope, the floor area increases by 19 percent, with an associated
j ump in cost that is nearly as much. Energy expended to heat or cool
the space between the layers could be used far more eff ic ien t ly to
heat or cool the inhabited space of the bu i ld ing, with a considerable
saving in operating expenses. In large buildings with two layers of
windows, the ongoing cost of window washing is doubled. These fig-
ures indicate that careful analysis is in order before beginning design
and construction of a double-skin or double-envelope building.

Thermal Capacity

Thermal capacity, the ability to store heat, is an important property
of bu i ld ing materials. Thermal capacity is roughly proportional to

58

8.14

mass. Large quantities of dense materials hold large quantities of
heat. F lu f fy materials and small pieces of material hold small quan-
tities of heat. Thermal capacity is measured as the amount of heat
required to raise the temperature of a unit volume or un it weight of
material by one degree. Water has a higher thermal capacity than
does any other material at ordinary air temperatures (except for
certain substances that freeze and thaw at ordinary temperatures).
Earth, brick, stone, plaster, metals, and concrete have high thermal

59

Thermal Capacities

Water 

Steel 
Stone 

Concrete 

bri'Ck 

Clay soil 

Wood 

Mineral wool 
5.15

Per unit mass 
BTU 
KJ 

lb°F 

l .o 

kg°c 

4.19 

Per un it volume
BILL 
Jd__

ft3°F m5°c

62 

4i6o

O,IZ 
O.2I 

0.21 

0.20 

o.2o 

0.45 

0.20 

O.50 
O.86 

o.8& 

O.84 

0.54 

1-69 

a84 

59 
36 

31 

25 

20 

/4 

0.4 

3960
2415

2030

(660

i35o

940

27

capacities (8.15). Fabrics and thermal insulating materials have low
capacities.
In order to appreciate the effect of thermal capacity on bu i ld ing
performance, let us consider the hypothetical case of three ident-
ical, very well insulated test chambers, each connected to its own
warm-air heating system. Into the first chamber we place a thousand
bricks, each standing on end with plenty of airspace between it and
the su r round ing bricks. In the second chamber, we stack a thousand
of the same bricks into a solid cube. In the third chamber we place
a thousand blocks of dry wood, each equal in size to a brick, stand-
ing on end in a loose array identical to that of the bricks in the first
chamber. We leave the three chambers open to the laboratory air
for several days to make sure that the air and contents of each have
equilibrated at an identical temperature. Then we ad just the thermo-
stats in the three chambers to identical settings 30 degrees above
the laboratory room temperature, close the chambers, and switch
on the three heating systems. For each chamber, a recorder plots a
graph of total fuel consumption versus time.
After correcting the three graphs for inc iden tal heat losses from
the chambers to the air of the laboratory, a striking pattern emerges
(8.16). Initially the rate of fuel consumption to heat the three cham-
bers is approximately equal as the air tempera tures are raised the
first few degrees. Then the fuel consumption of the third chamber,
the one containing the wood blocks, begins to fall off as the thermo-
stat calls for less and less heat. The thermostat ceases to call for heat
altogether after a relatively short period of time, mean ing that
both the air and the wood blocks have reached the temperature of
the thermostat setting. Meanwhile, the first chamber, with its loose
bricks, continues to requ ire heat and consumes both more fuel
and more time than does the third chamber before its temperature

60

8.16

stabilizes at the higher level. While this is going on, however, the
second chamber, with its tight stack of bricks, is burning fuel more
slowly than the first chamber, and it continues to consume fuel long
after both the other chambers are at equilibrium. After a very long
time, it, too, reaches equilibrium after consuming exactly the same
amount of fuel as did the chamber containing the same volume of
bricks in a loose array.
What has happened is that the wood blocks, which have a ther-
mal capacity per un it volume about half that of the bricks, require
only about half as much heat to warm them up. The bricks, with
their higher thermal capacity, requ ire more heat to warm them to
the same temperature, and the amount is the same whether the bricks
are arrayed loosely or in a compact volume. The loosely arrayed
bricks, however, have many times as much surface area exposed to
the air as do the bricks in a cube and are thus able to absorb heat
from the air relatively quickly. In the brick cube, the heat penetra-
ting from the surface must warm each layer of bricks in turn, and
the bricks in the very core of the cube will not be warmed to the air
temperature of the chamber until all the surrounding layers have
been warmed. This process is a very slow one.
As an application of this experiment, imagine three identical,
well-insulated bu i ld ings in a cold climate. The first has thin interior
partitions of brick. The second contains the same volume of brick-
work, but it is all concentrated in a massive, unused fireplace
standing free in the middle of the building. The third has wooden
partitions and contains no bricks at all (8.17). When furnaces are
turned on in the three buildings, the th ird bu i ld ing will heat up very
quickly; the first will heat very slowly; and the second will reach the
desired air temperature after an intermediate period of time but will

61

continue for a very long time to requ ire additional inputs of heat to
warm its masonry mass. (Notice that the graphs in figure 8.17 plot
temperature versus time, whereas those in figure 8.16 plot fuel con-
sumption against t ime .)
If heat is introduced into these same three buildings at sporadic
but identical intervals as, for example, by sunlight streaming in
the windows whenever the sky happens to be clear, the bu i ld ing
with wooden partitions will experience wide fluctuations in its air
temperature, and the other two will tend to lessen the fluctuations
considerably (8.18).

8.17

8.18

62

When a massive fireplace has a fire built in it, some of the sudden
and intense heat of the flames is radiated and convected directly
into the interior of the building, but a great deal goes to warm the
masonry of the fireplace and chimney. This heat is released slowly
when the fire is low or after it is extinguished. Some of the heat goes
up the chimney to the outdoors and some through the walls of the
chimney and fireplace and through the fireplace opening to the
interior of the building. By this means, the fireplace itself serves
to even out and prolong the flow of heat from a fire. Some fuel-
bu rn ing stoves are constructed massively of stone or ceramic, for
similar reasons. Masses of masonry or water can be used to accumul-
ate heat from solar collectors for release at night or on cloudy days.
They can also serve to accumulate heat from electric resistance ele-
ments dur ing off-peak hours when electric rates are lower, for use in
heating the house du r ing the rest of the day.
Consider an exterior wall of a building that is constructed of a
thick layer of a high-capacity material such as adobe, stone, brick, or
concrete and is subjected to a difference in temperature between
the outdoors and the indoors (8.19). The wall is warmed only slowly
by the heat penetrating from the warmer side, as heat is absorbed
in turn by each internal layer of the wall. Eventually a stable con-
dition is reached in which the temperature of the colder side of
the wall approaches the cold-side air temperature; the warmer side
approaches the warm-side air temperature; and a straight-line gra-
dient of temperature exists through the thickness of the wall. Until
this stable condition prevails, the wall transmits heat from the one
side to the other at a rate lower than what would be predicted solely
from the thermal resistance of the wall. Once a stable condition is
achieved, however, heat is transferred at the predicted rate. Because
materials of high thermal capacity are characterized by low thermal
resistances, this rate is quite rapid compared with that of a well-
insulated wall.
When the air temperature on one side of a high-capacity wall
fluctuates, the wall acts to diminish and delay the fluctuations of air
temperature on the other side (S.zoa). A very useful example of this
is the heavy mud or stone architecture that is common throughout
the warm desert climates of the world. During the day, the outdoor
air is hot, and heat migrates slowly through the wall or roof toward
the interior of the building. Before much of the heat can penetrate
the thick construction to reach the interior, however, the sun sets.
Radiational cooling of the ground results in rapid cooling of the
outdoor air to temperatures below that of the warm exterior of the
building. The cooler air cools the exterior building surfaces. Direct
radiational cooling of exterior surfaces, particularly the roof, also
takes place. Much of the heat that was accumulated during the day

6?

8.19

in the walls and roof now does a U-turn and flows slowly back toward
the cool exterior surfaces, rather than continuing its migration toward
the interior. The net effect is that the bu i ld ing interior is cooler than
its surroundings during the day and warmer at night, which is precisely
the pattern the occupants require to remain comfortable. Thermally
optimal thicknesses of walls and roofs for various materials and vari-
ous climates have been arrived at by centuries of trial and error. In
many geographical areas, the effect of thermal mass is enhanced by
the whitewashing of exterior bu i ld ing surfaces. Whitewash reflects
most solar infrared radiation but is a fairly efficient emitter of long-
wave infrared from heated building surfaces to the night sky. Windows
are small and are closed tightly du r ing the most intense heat of the
day or the most intense cold of the night, so as not to let convective
heat transfer work against the actions of the walls and roof.
Contemporary utilitarian buildings in many warm desert areas
are constructed with low-capacity roofs made of th in, corrugated
sheets of metal or cement-asbestos. The thermal performance of
such buildings is radically different than that of the massive build-
ings of the preced ing example (8.2ob). The lightweight roofs heat
almost instantaneously in the sun. Much of this heat is conducted
and reradiated to the interior of the building, quickly raising its
temperature to unbearab le levels. At night, such roofs lose their
heat quickly to the sky and chill the interior space and its occupants
by means of both convection and radiation. When such a mistaken
choice of materials has been made, its thermal effects can be ameli-
orated by adding a thick layer of insulation and /or high-capacity
material below the roof, preferably with a generous, ventilated
airspace just below the roofing to allow the escape of solar heat to
the outside air.
Materials of high thermal resistance can often be combined with
materials of high thermal capacity to help achieve a desired pattern
of thermal behavior in a building enclosure. Heavy, warm-climate
buildings can be made to function even more effectively by the
addition of a layer of insulation outside the masonry enclosure. The
insulation reduces the amplitude of the temperature fluctuations
to which the masonry is exposed, making the indoor temperature
extremely stable (8.21). The same amount of insulation applied
inside the masonry enclosure is considerably less effective. In this
configuration the mass of the structure is still fu l ly exposed to solar
heat gain and to variations in outdoor air temperature. The insula-
tion on the interior is virtually wasted in dealing only with the small
temperature swings of the interior surfaces of the masonry. External
insu la t ion offers the additional advantage of protecting the bu i ld ing,
particularly the roof structure, from extreme stresses of thermal
expansion and contraction.

64

8.20

Even in temperate climates, the addition of thermal capacity
inside the well-insulated enclosure that is normally provided helps
to level out wintertime fluctuations in air temperature caused by
solar heat gains through windows, heat losses through windows,
and internal heat gains from fireplace fires, bathing, cooking, and
baking. In summer, the added capacity helps to moderate high day-
time temperatures.
On the other hand, buildings in hot, damp climates where night
temperatures remain high work best when they have as little thermal
capacity as possible. They should be designed instead to reflect away
solar heat and to react as quickly as possible to cooling breezes and
small downward shifts in air temperature. A typical indigenous
house in such a climate is elevated above the ground on wooden
poles to catch the wind, is roofed with a light covering of thatch, and
has walls that are open screens of wood or reeds.
In colder climates, buildings such as weekend ski chalets that
are occupied only occasionally during the winter ought to be low
in thermal capacity but high in resistance, so that they will warm
quickly for occupancy and cool quickly after the occupants have
departed, wasting no stored heat on an empty interior. A well-
insulated wood frame construction with a wood-paneled interior
would be appropriate.
High thermal resistance is a desirable attribute of building enclos-
ures under nearly all climatic conditions, especially in roofs, which
are subject to both large solar heat gains and large cold-weather heat
losses. In addition to high thermal resistance, high thermal capacity
is also desirable where cyclical daily temperature variations need
to be smoothed out. The combined effects on the indoor thermal
environment of thermal capacity, thermal resistance, radiant gains
and losses through windows, gains and losses from ventilation,
and gains from heat released within the building are complex, espe-
cially when several of these factors vary independently with time.
But even in the absence of a detailed mathematical analysis, an
informed designer ought to be able to make pre l im inary selections
of materials and design decisions that are thermally correct in a
qualitative sense, and reasonably close quantitatively.
Because of the high thermal capacity of the soil, building surfaces
that are in contact with earth that lies below the deepest penetration
of frost, such as basement walls or walls against which earth is banked,
remain within a narrow temperature range throughout the year
(8.22). This range is centered on the annual average air temperature
at any geographic location. In hot weather, underground surfaces
remain cool, and in cold weather, they remain warm relative to out-
door air temperatures. Because of this, the bur ied portions of build-
ings are generally much easier and cheaper to cool in summer and

65

8.21

to heat in winter. In order to realize these important advantages,
however, unde rg round bu i ld ing surfaces must be insulated to
thermal resistance values approaching those considered optimal in
above-ground portions of the bu i ld ing enclosure. Where possible,
frost penetration into the ground ad jacent to the bu i ld ing should be
m in im ized by bu ry ing horizontal sheets of foam plastic insulation
ju st below the surface of the soil.
In part because of the ir thermal advantages, unde rg round build-
ings have been designed and constructed at every scale in recent
years, from small residences to very large office and laboratory com-
plexes. Many bu i ld ings are earth-sheltered, meaning that they are
not really underground, but are built low in the earth and have earth
mounded up around the ir walls. The largest problem that must
usually be overcome in underground and earth-sheltered buildings
is that of keeping ground water out of the bu i ld ing. Solutions to this
problem are presented in chapter 12.

Water Vapor

The interactions of various bu i ld ing materials and water vapor are
of extreme importance to the thermal behavior of buildings. Water
vapor is a colorless, odorless gas. It is universally present in the a ir,
but in widely varying quantities. The warmer the air is, the more
water vapor it is able to contain, but air seldom contains as much
vapor as it could at a given temperature. The most convenient way
of def in ing the water vapor content of air is by relative humidity,
a percentage figure that represents the quan t i ty of vapor that the
air actually contains divided by the max imum quantity of vapor it
could contain at the given tempera ture. A relative hum id i ty (RH)
of 60 percent indicates that the air contains six-tenths as much
water vapor as it could at the given tempera ture. This RH can easily
be raised in an enclosed space by adding water vapor to the air.
This can be done by boiling water to release steam, by washing
or bathing, by bringing lots of green plants indoo r s—or simply
by breathing. If the relative hum id i ty is raised to 100 percent, as it
sometimes is in a gymnasium shower room or a sw imm ing pool
enclosure, the air can hold no more water vapor, and so some begins
to condense as fog.
Another way to raise the relative humidity is to reduce the
temperature of the room without allowing any air to escape. As the
temperature falls, the mass of water vapor in the air remains constant,
but the capacity of the air to contain it diminishes, wh ich means
that the relative hum id i ty rises. (You will remember that this is what
happens to outdoor air as it rises up a moun ta in, cooling by means
of expansion.) If the temperature drops low enough, it will reach

66

8.22

the dew point, the temperature at which the air contains 100 percent
RH. If cooling continues below the dew point, the gaseous water
vapor will begin to turn to liquid, usually in the form of droplets of
fog. Only enough vapor will condense at a given temperature to
maintain 100 percent RH, with the remainder staying in the air as a
gas. If the temperature is reduced still fu r the r, another increment
will condense, ju st enough to br ing the air mass to 100 percent RH
at the new temperature. The dew point is not, of course, a single,
fixed temperature; every mass of air has its own dew point, which is
determined by the proportion of water vapor that the air contains.
The drier the air is, the lower its dew point will be, and the more
moist the air is, the higher its dew point will be.
Air in buildings is frequently cooled below its dew point by
coming into contact with cold surfaces. We see this phenomenon
in hum id summer weather, when condensed moisture appears as
"sweat" on a glass that contains a cool drink, a cold-water pipe, a
tank of cold water on the back of a toilet, or a cool basement wall.
Condensate dripping from pipes and tanks often causes water stain-
ing, mildew, and decay in buildings. In cold weather, the most
visible evidence of air cooled below its dew point is on cold window
panes, which become fogged and sometimes frosted from the con-
densation of interior water vapor. Although fog and frost on windows
are often picturesque, they later collect as liquid on window frames,
encouraging rust or decay.
Much more serious damage can be done to a bu i ld ing when
water vapor condenses in an insulated assembly, such as an exterior
wall. In cold weather, the wall is exposed to warm, relatively hum id
air on the inside and to cool, relatively dry air on the exterior (8.23).
In hot, hum id, summer weather, the situation can be reversed when
the air inside the building is cooled and dehum id i f ied.
Water vapor in air exerts a partial gas pressure known as vapor
pressure. The higher the moisture content in the air is, the higher the
vapor pressure will be. This pressure drives the water vapor to expand
into areas of lower vapor pressure, seeking to create equilibrium. In
a condition in which moist air is on one side of a wall and drier air
is on the other, water vapor (an invisible gas, remembe r) migrates
through the wall from the moist side to the dry side, driven by a
d ifferen t ial in vapor pressure between the two sides. Where there
are air leaks in the wall, air currents can also carry water vapor, often
in much larger quantities than are carried by vapor pressure
differences. Most common bu i ld ing materials o f fer only slight-to-
moderate resistance to the passage of water vapor, and consider-
able quantities of vapor are pumped through the wall with only
slight-to-moderate losses in vapor pressure from the moist side to
the dry side. These losses are reflected in a progressive decrease in

67

8.23

the dew point temperature as the vapor moves from the moist side
to the dry side.
Simultaneously, the temperature of the interior of the wall drops
gradually from the warmer surface to the cooler one (8.24). The
warm-side wall surface, protected by an insulating air film, is slightly
cooler than the air on that side. Through the various layers of con-
struction, the temperature drops at d i f fe rent rates, depending on the
various thermal resistances of the materials, un t il at the cool side of
the wall, the surface is ju st slightly warmer than the cold air.
Problems arise within the wall whenever the temperature of the
wall at a given location falls below the dew point at that location,
causing the water vapor to condense and wet the interior construc-
tion of the wall. Whenever moisture condenses from the air, a slight
local decrease in the vapor pressure of the air is created, and vapor
migrates toward the area of condensation from su r round ing areas of
higher vapor pressure. By this means the water vapor keeps moving
relentlessly to the zone of condensation, and condensate keeps
form ing, unless either the d ifference in vapor pressure between the
two sides or the d i f fe rence in temperature decreases suff ic ien t ly
to halt the condensation. Where air passes through leaks in the
wall construction, the same phenomenon occurs. The result is fre-
quently a wall whose thermal insulation is saturated and sagging
under the weight of its absorbed water. In this state the insulating
material is almost totally ineffective. The wall conducts heat much
more rapidly, and the heating-fuel requirements of the bu i ld ing are
correspondingly increased. Decay or corrosion of the wall f ram ing
is a frequent side effect of vapor condensation, an effect made more
serious by the fact that the deterioration often lies concealed from
sight until it is extensive enough to cause structural problems.
When migrating water vapor encounters a relatively impervious
layer, such as a well-applied coat of exterior paint, the vapor pressure
can raise "blisters," literally l if t ing the paint off the wall. Peeling
exterior paint on houses is most frequently seen outside kitchens
and bathrooms, where interior vapor pressure is highest.
To avoid these problem situations, a vapor retarder, also known,
less accurately, as a vapor barrier, should be installed as near to the
warm side of the construction as possible, but in any case between
the main insulating layer and the warm side. A typical vapor retarder
is a continuous, vapor-tight sheet of polyethylene plastic or metal
foil. For best results in ordinary house construction, it should be
applied across the interior face of the wall and ceiling f ram ing a f ter
the thermal insulation has been installed. Seams should be sealed
with tape or mastic. The effect of the vapor retarder is to prevent
water vapor from entering the wall cavity, so as to ma in ta in the dew
point within the wall assembly well below the temperature of the

68

8.24

wall materials and entrapped air (8.25). This prevents moisture from
condensing inside the wall.
In older buildings with vapor problems, it is often not feasible to
install a proper vapor retarder. The best that can be done is to plug
air leaks in the walls and apply a good coat of paint to the warm-side
surface. Special vapor-retarding interior paints are available for this
purpose.
Dripping cold-water pipes should be insulated well and then
wrapped vapor tight with a plastic or metal jacket. The insulation
keeps the jacket well above the dew-point temperature, and the
jacket prevents the water vapor from entering and condensing w i th in
the insulation.
The tanks of water closets also drip in humid weather. Tanks are
available with insulating liners of plastic foam inside the tank; the
liner raises the outside surface temperature of the tank above the
dewpoint. The porcelain tank acts as a vapor retarder.
A window pane, quite vapor tight already, can usually have its
temperature raised above the dew point by installing a second sheet
of glass with an airspace between as insulation. This second sheet
can be a storm window or part of a double-glazing assembly.
The vapor retarder is always installed on the warm side of any
building assembly. For a building in a cold climate, this is the
inside. For an ar t if ic ia l ly cooled bu i ld ing in a tropical climate, the
warm side is the outside. Buildings in climates that are never very
hot or very cold may not need vapor retarders at all.
Membrane roofs in cold climates present a particular problem
with respect to water vapor, for the waterproof membrane is quite
naturally installed on top of the entire roof construction, which is
the cold side, to protect the construction from rain and snow (8.26).
This membrane, however, is also a very effective vapor retarder,
and it is on the cold side, which is the wrong side, of the thermal
insulation. Thus if no additional vapor retarder is provided at the
warm underside of the roof, the roof membrane will be sub ject
to blistering from internal vapor pressure, and the insulating and
structural materials of the roof deck will be exposed to condensa-
tion. And if a separate vapor retarder is provided on the warm side,
any residual moisture from rains or concrete work dur ing construc-
tion will be trapped between the two layers and is also be likely to
cause problems. Until recently there was no adequate solution to
this dilemma, but with the introduction of water-resistant rigid foam
insulating materials, inverted roof construction has become possible
(8.27). The roof membrane is laid directly on the structural deck.
The boards of rigid foam insulation are then laid over the mem-
brane, where they are held down and protected from the sun by a
layer of gravel. The result is a roof in which the membrane is near

69

8.25

8.26

8.27

8.28

the warm side and is ma in ta ined at a tempera ture well above the
dew point. As a side benefit, the membrane is also protected from
the extremes of outdoor tempera ture and sunlight that attack and
eventually destroy membrane roofs.

Airtightness

Air leaks through walls and roofs waste energy in two d ifferent ways:
by letting outdoor air in and indoor air out, and by transporting
water vapor to places where it condenses. The installation of an air
barrier in walls and roofs is requ ired by most bu i ld ing codes for these
reasons. The na ture of the air barr ier depends on the type of con-
struction. In a masonry wall, it is often a layer of sticky mastic that is
spread over the surface of the interior layer of masonry within the
cavity between the interior and fac ing layers (8.28). In many types
of framed walls, it is a con t inuous sheet material that is wrapped
a round the outside of the bu i ld ing just before the exterior finish
material is applied. To work properly, the air barr ier must not allow
air currents to pass, but because it is often installed on the cold side
of a wall, it must allow free passage of water vapor. There are a num-
ber of sheet products that are designed specifically to have these
properties. It is also possible in many situations to use a vapor tight
air barrier on the warm side of the wall and have it serve also as a
vapor retarder.

Thermal Feel

It remains to discuss one more important thermal characteristic of
bu i ld ing materials: how they feel when we touch them. This is of no
consequence in ceilings, roofs, and outside walls, wh ich are unlikely
to be touched by people, but it is an important factor in selecting
materials for floors, in ter ior walls, tables, chairs, benches, and beds.
Most of us instinctively make correct judgments that certain ma-
terials used in certain ways will feel either cold or warm. Seeking a
bench in a park on a chilly day, do we select the granite bench or the
wooden one? Do we prefer to step from a warm bath onto a ceramic
tile floor or onto a deep-pile bathmat? Should the door handle in a
2oo°F (9O°C) sauna be made of steel or redwood? Should a child's
playroom have a concrete floor or a wooden one?
Materials that are warm to the touch—wood, carpeting, up-
holstery, bedding, some p las t ics—a re those that are low in thermal
capacity and high in thermal resistance. By means of conduction,
the body quickly warms a thin surface layer of the material to a
temperature approaching the tempera ture of the skin, and so the
material feels warm. Materials that feel cold against the body have the

70

characteristics of high thermal capacity and low thermal resistance.
When we touch a room-temperature surface of metal, stone, plaster,
concrete, or brick, heat is drawn quickly from the body for an
extended period of time by a relatively large bulk of cooler material,
and a cold feeling results. An excellent example of this is the d iffer-
ence between a j2°¥ (22°C) room and a bath of J2°F water. The
room feels pleasantly warm, but the bath feels unpleasantly cool. Air
is a poor conductor of heat and has a low thermal capacity, whereas
water is exactly the opposite. The body gives off heat to 72° air at a
comfortable rate but loses heat much too quickly to 72° water.
Similarly, a 72° plaster wall feels cool, and a 72° upholstered chair is
quite cozy. A 72° carpeted floor feels comfortable to bare feet, but a
concrete floor needs to be heated to a higher temperature from
within by electric resistance wires or hot-water pipes, or from with-
out by exposure to sunlight, to achieve the same degree of comfort.

Further Reading

B. Civoni. Man, Climate, and Architecture. New York, Elsevier, 1969, pp. 96-155.

71

9

Controlling the
Radiation or Heat

One essential role of a bu i ld ing in providing thermal comfort is
controlling the flow of thermal radiation to and f rom the human
body. Sometimes a bu i ld ing must protect the body from an exces-
sive in f lux of rad iant heat from the sun or from sun-warmed objects.
At other times, protection is needed to prevent an excessive radiation
of heat from the body to a cold outdoor environment. Exchanges
of radiation also take place continually between the body and the
surround ing interior surfaces of the building, requ i r ing that the
temperatures of these surfaces be regulated su f f ic ien t ly to ensure
comfort. In some situations, the active man ipu la t ion of radiation is
appropriate as the m a jor mechan ism in a scheme for ach iev ing
thermal comfort for the occupants of a bu i ld ing.

Radiational Intensity vs. Distance from Radiant Source

We have already noted that thermal rad ia t ion consists of elec-
tromagnetic energy in the infrared range of wavelengths and that it
behaves very much like visible light. A point source, such as the
incandescent filament of a lightbulb, radiates heat to a nearby ob ject
at a rate that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between the filament and the ob ject (9.1). (The sun operates by this
inverse-square law in heating the earth.) It is possible to receive a
very high in f lux of infrared by placing one's hand close to the bulb,
whereas if the hand is w i thdrawn to a point several feet away, the
heating effect is scarcely noticeable.
If the same bu lb is placed in front of a parabolic reflector, most of
the diverging rays of the filament can be focused into a parallel
beam of moderate rad iant intensity (9.2). Within this beam, the rate

72

9.1

9.2

of radiant flow is constant without respect to distance, except for the
energy absorbed by dust particles in the air and by the air itself, and
for losses caused by inaccurate focusing of the beam.
A surface of infinite extent also radiates to a point ob ject
at an intensity that is independent of distance. A bird flying 500
feet (150 m) above the middle of the Sahara Desert receives
ju st as intense radiation from the hot sands as a traveler on foot
does.

Mean Radiant Temperature

Usually we are surrounded by objects of d i f fe r ing surface temper-
atures. Suppose that you are sitting in a high-backed, upholstered
chair, fac ing a cozy fire to your right and a large window that frames
a view of a frozen lake to your left (9.3). The chair serves as a barrier
to radiation, so that no significant quantity of radiation is being given
or received through the back surfaces of your body. The flames and
glowing coals of the fire are high-temperature objects, larger than
point sources but smaller than inf in i te surfaces, which radiate heat
rapidly to your body. The window is a large, cold object to which
your body radiates heat. Above is a large ceiling that is somewhat
cooler than your body that causes another net outflow of your body
heat. The floor and walls exert radiant cooling effects similar to that
of the ceiling. In such a situation, it is not immediately apparent
whether the sum of these radiant flows on your body is, overall, a net
gain or loss of heat.
In order to assess the net overall radiant flow, we measure the
temperature of each surface (the fire, window, ceiling, walls, and floor)
and the solid spherical angle subtended by each surface with respect
to your body. The mean radiant temperature (MRT) to which you
are exposed is an average of the temperatures of each of the sur-
round ing surfaces, weighted according to the spherical angle sub-
tended by each and the thermal emissivity of each. In our example,
perhaps 40 percent of your body is shielded by the chair. Your body
"sees" the intensely hot fire as about 3 percent of its spherical field
of thermal "vision" (9.4). The cold window surface might constitute
15 percent, and the ceiling, walls, and floor the remainder. The fire
is the only source of net radiant heat flow to your body in this
example. Because it subtends an angle of only 3 percent of a sphere
with respect to your body, it must be very hot if it is to overcome
the cooling effect of the cooler surfaces that occupy 57 percent of
your body's field of thermal "vision."
MRT is not in itself a suff ic ient measure of the thermal comfort
that may be expected in response to the radiant conditions in
an environment. Everyone is fam i l iar with the experience of being

73

9.3

9.4

9.5

roasted on one side by a bonf ire while being frozen on the other
by radiation to a cold night sky. The MRT may be appropriate
for comfort in this case, but the distribution of heated surfaces
around the body is not (9.5). To prevent excessively rapid gains
or losses from any one area of the body, there must be a balance
among the temperatures of the surfaces to which the body is
exposed. A balance is also requ ired among heat gains and losses
by convection, conduction, and evaporation. In a bu i ld ing with
uninsulated walls or very large windows, regardless of the temper-
ature to which the air is heated and in spite of a warm fire in the
fireplace, one may be uncomfortable in cold weather because of the
excessive rad iant flow from the body to the large, cold surfaces of
the bu i ld ing. Similarly, the fr ig id air from an air conditioner will
not be su f f ic ient to produce comfort in hot weather if the body is
exposed to direct sun l ight coming through a window or skylight.
If the indoor MRT is high in w in ter, air temperatures can be some-
what lower, thus reduc ing heat losses through the enclosure of the
building and saving heating fue l. In summer, a bu i ld ing of high
thermal capacity is likely to have cool interior surface temperatures,
allowing comfort at higher air temperatures, with attendant savings
in cooling costs.

Manipulating Radiant Temperature

If we wish to raise the mean radiant temperature in a particular
interior location, we can pursue any or all of the following strategies:

1. We can allow the sun to penetrate to that location. The sun is
a fickle heating device, but a pleasant and economical one.
We use it almost instinctively, as does a dog or cat who dozes
happily in a shaft of sunlight in the winter.
2. We can help the building 's heating system to warm the
interior bu i ld ing surfaces to a higher tempera ture by install-
ing better thermal insulation in the walls and ceilings and
multiple layers of glass and /or insulating cur ta ins or shutters
in the windows. Good thermal insulation of a bu i ld ing pays
off in increased radiant comfort, as it does in every other
respect.
3. We can use highly reflective surfaces to reflect body heat back
to the body. (This is how a reflective-foil emergency blanket
works.) This strategy has almost never been used in buildings,
but it has considerable potential for use if heating fuel be-
comes more scarce, especially if the reflective surfaces can be
incorporated into fu rn i tu re. This is an in tr igu ing area for
architects and fu rn i tu re designers to explore.

74

4. We can heat very large surfaces, such as floors or ceilings, to
temperatures a few degrees above the skin temperature of the
body.
5. We can heat small surfaces, such as electric filaments,
gas-heated ceramic tiles, metal stoves, or fireplaces, to temper-
atures hundreds of degrees above the skin temperature of the
body.

These last two strategies merit further explanation. Schemes for
heating floors or ceilings are fairly commonplace. They usually employ
electric resistance wires, warm air circulating through multiple
ducts, or warm water circulating through coils of plastic tubing.
(Heating of walls is not usually attempted, because we tend to drive
nails and screws into walls for hanging pictures and shelves.)
Formerly, floors for radiant heating had to consist of copper pipes
embedded in concrete slabs. More recently, systems based on plastic
tubing have made it possible to turn even wooden floors into radiant
heat sources. Floor systems are attractive because they warm the
feet by conduction and set up convection currents that heat the air
in the room quite evenly. But they have several limitations: Tables
and desks cast infrared shadows that hamper the ability of the warm
floor to heat hands and arms (9.6). The efficiency of such systems
is reduced by rugs and carpets. Because of the considerable
thermal capacity of the floor materials, they are incapable of react-
ing quickly to small or sudden changes in the demand for heat
inside a building.
Ceiling systems have their own problems. The air warmed by a
warm ceiling tends to remain at the ceiling, leading to lower overall
efficiencies and a stratum of cool air at floor level, a defect made
worse by the infrared shadows that tables and desks cast on people's
legs and feet (9.7).
Small, high-temperature infrared heat sources with focusing
reflectors are highly effective if installed so as not to cast shadows.
They are especially useful where high air temperatures cannot be
maintained, as in large industrial buildings or even outdoors,
because they can produce heat instantaneously when it is needed
and beam it precisely to where it is needed (9.8). Open fires
and stoves are less eff ic ient radiant heat sources because of their
omnidirectional, 
inverse-square radiation and because of the
relatively large amount of fuel that they convert to warm air rather
than radiant energy.
Because of its similarity to solar radiation, infrared heat from
either low- or high-temperature sources feels very pleasant on the
bare skin. Swimming pools, shower rooms, and bathrooms are
particularly appropriate locations for radiant heating systems.

9.6

9.7

75

9.8

Radiational Cooling

Our means for lowering the mean radiant tempera ture of an interior
location are somewhat more restricted than our means for raising it.
We cannot, for example, cool our bodies by exposing them to a
small surface at a very low temperature. Whereas we can easily heat
an electric filament or gas flame to a tempera ture a thousand or
more degrees above body temperature, there are only a few hund red
degrees with which to work between body temperature and absolute
zero, and devices for p roduc ing very low temperatures are expensive
to bu i ld and operate. Fur thermore, a very cold surface quickly frosts
over with moisture that condenses from the air, thereby losing most
of its effectiveness because of the insulating properties of the frost.
Even a moderately cold surface becomes moist and unpleasant in
warm summer weather, wh ich is why we do not actively cool floors
and ceilings except in rare cases when we can control the hum id i ty
at a level low enough to eliminate condensation. What we can do
instead is to shade roofs, walls, and windows against the summer
sun, surface them on the exterior with highly reflective coatings
whenever practical, insulate them well, and provide enough thermal
capacity in the interior surfaces of the building to ensure the main-
tenance of cool temperatures throughout the day. We can also, in
some cases, open a bu i ld ing to the night sky, allowing our bodies
and the warm surfaces of the bu i ld ing to radiate heat into space.
To imp lement many of these strategies for man ipu la t ing mean
rad iant temperatures upward or downward, we must utilize the
bu i ld ing 's enclosure and take into account its interactions with out-
side thermal forces. Among these, the most important are the inf low
of solar and terrestrial radiation and the outflow of radiation at night.
The roof of a bu i ld ing is a barr ier against excessive summer t ime
solar radiation, especially in the tropical latitudes where the sun
passes directly overhead. The roof surface itself is of extreme import-
ance. A surface that is highly reflective of solar infrared radiation
is heated very little by the sun, whereas an infrared absorptive roof
surface can reach extremely high temperatures. The transmission of
solar heat from the roof to the ceilings inside the building can be
reduced by the use of thermal resistance, thermal capacity, and /or
ventilation of spaces w i th in the roof structure (9.9). Under inclined
roofs, the convective d ra ft of the heated air can provide the ventilat-
ing force to remove the heat, if the roof is appropriately designed
(9.10).
In tropical latitudes, the sun passes so high overhead that north
and south walls of buildings receive relatively little solar radiation,
but east and west walls need protection of the same general sort as
that for roofs described in the previous paragraph (9.11). In more

76

9.9

9.10

9.11

9.12

9.13

northerly locations, the roof and the east and west walls requ ire
protection against the summer sun, and also the south wall. For low
buildings, deciduous shade trees and vines are a preferred method
of sun control, especially because they shed their leaves and allow
most sunlight to penetrate dur ing the cold months. A roof overhang
or horizontal shading devices at each floor can block the high
summertime sun from south-facing walls but still admit light and
heat from the low winter sun (9.12, 9.13).
In cold weather, of course, such solar radiation as can be absorbed
by roofs and walls is usually a welcome addition to the heat content
of the building. Some designers have gone so far as not to insulate
the south-facing sides of buildings. This is a misguided effort, for
cloudy weather and short hours of daylight bring relatively few hours
of sunshine in winter, with the result that for about three-quarters
of the winter hours in a typical northern climate, a south-facing
surface is losing more heat than it gains. A more productive strategy
is to insulate south-facing wall surfaces well and to utilize large
south-facing windows to trap solar heat, closing them off with
insulating shutters or heavy curtains or shades (preferably reflective
of long-wave infrared) when the sun is not out. The well-insulated
wall surfaces do not gain appreciable heat when the sun is out, but
their heat losses are reduced or eliminated by the solar heating of
their exterior layers.
The same highly reflective exterior surfaces that are useful in
reducing solar heat gain in the summer can also help reduce build-
ing heat losses in winter because of their low rate of emission
of rad iant heat. Polished metals are the only common building
materials that are ineff ic ient emitters of low-temperature infrared.
White paint, excellent as a barr ier against solar radiation, does little
to slow the emission of bu i ld ing heat in cold weather.

77

9.14

In warm weather, sunlight entering through windows can pro-
duce an undesirable heating effect on the interior of the bu i ld ing
by wa rm ing interior surfaces that in tu rn warm the air of the room
and radiate heat to its occupants. Where possible, it is best to
intercept the sunlight outside the glass, with trees, vines, roof over-
hangs, louvers, or awnings (9.14). In this way the heat absorbed
by the shading device is reradiated and convected largely to the
outdoor env ironment rather than the interior. Outdoor shad ing
devices are d i f f i cu lt to ad ju st from inside the bu i ld ing, however,
and they are vulnerable to the destructive forces of Na ture. Some
architects, moreover, are unw i l l ing to accept the appearance of
exterior shading devices on the ir bu i ld ings. For these reasons,
interior shading devices such as roller shades, Venetian blinds,
and curtains are often used instead. The effect of these interior
devices is largely to absorb solar radiation and convert it to convected
heat in the interior air while shading occupants and fu rn ish ings
inside the bu i ld ing. Interior shading devices are therefore relatively
ineffective in reduc ing the solar heating of air inside a bu i ld ing.
They are, however, effective in protecting individuals from high
radiant heat gain from the sun and in reduc ing visual glare from
direct sunlight.
Ordinary window glass transmits more than 80 percent of solar
infrared radiation but absorbs the majority of the longer-wave infrared
from sun-warmed interior surfaces. In cold weather the glass loses
most of this absorbed heat by convection to the outside air. The glass
does serve, however, to prevent the passage of heated air from the
sun-warmed interior back to the outdoors, and it is primarily for this
reason that greenhouses, parked automobiles, and flat-plate solar
collectors are heated so dramatically by the sun.
Heat-absorbing and heat-reflecting glasses are frequen t ly used in
buildings to reduce summer air-conditioning loads. However, the
heat-absorbing glasses, usually gray or brownish in color, are not as
effective as one m ight first assume from pub l ished solar-absorption
figures. A glass that absorbs 60 percent of solar heat, for example,
does not transmit only 40 percent to the interior. The 60 percent
that is absorbed must ultimately go somewhere, and roughly half
is radiated and convected to the interior of the bu i ld ing and half
to the outdoors, giving a net overall reduction in solar heat gain
of only about 30 percent (9.15). Such a reduction may be perfectly
sufficient, of course, for many applications. Of much higher effici-
ency are the heat-reflecting glasses, which bounce back most of the
sun's heat without absorbing it. But a large wall of reflective glass
can reflect enough sun l ight to overheat ad jacent buildings and
outdoor areas quite seriously and to cause severe visual glare prob-
lems in neighboring streets and open spaces. A designer using

78

reflective glass must exercise restraint and good judgment to avoid
such problems.
If sufficient care is given to window orientations, much of the
expenditure of materials, equipment, and fuel energy to deal with
problems of solar heat gain through windows can be avoided. In
temperate, northern hemisphere locations, north-facing windows
lose radiated heat in all seasons of the year, especially in the winter.
East-facing windows gain heat very rapidly in summer because the
sun shines into them at a very direct angle, but this gain occurs only
in the mornings, when some influx of heat is often welcome after
a cool night. South-facing windows receive solar heat for most of
the day in summer, but at a low intensity, because the high sun
strikes the glass at a very acute angle. In winter, the sun arrives at a
low angle through south-facing windows for the entire day, bringing
a warmth that is usually beneficial to the occupants of the building.
West windows receive heat rapidly on summer afternoons, when the
building is already warm, and generally overheat the rooms in
which they are located. This effect is especially unfor tuna te in west-
facing bedrooms, which reach maximum temperature at bedtime
in summer. It is fu r ther aggravated if the west walls of the house are
poorly insulated, allowing the interior wall surfaces to heat up and
emit rad iant heat. Shade trees planted to the west, or deep awnings
over the windows, can be of considerable help in correcting existing
problems of western exposure. In tropical latitudes, of course, east
and west windows gain huge amounts of solar heat and should be
shielded by exterior shading devices.
Radiational outflow of heat from a bu i ld ing is at a max imum on
clear, dry nights and is especially rapid from roof surfaces that "see"
large portions of the night sky. Roofing materials frequently cool
by nocturnal radiation to temperatures that are appreciably below
surround ing air temperatures. In areas where nighttime air hum id-
ities are generally low and skies are clear in hot weather, water may
be cooled by contact with the roof at night and then stored in
an insulated tank for use in cooling the building dur ing the day.
Building surfaces may be cooled directly by the water if the humid-
ity is low enough, or the water may be used to absorb heat from the
coils of a mechanical air-conditioning system.
A more direct use of night radiant cooling is the construction of
roofs of high thermal capacity in hot, dry climates. The roofs lose
heat rapidly at night and become quite cool, which enables them to
absorb a great deal of the sun's heat dur ing the day without allowing
much of it to get to the interior of the building. The most direct
application of all, however, is simply to sleep outdoors at night
in warm weather, as is commonly done on flat rooftops in many
areas of the world, thereby overcoming the heating effect of the air

79

9.15

9.16

by radiating heat directly from the body to the in f in i te blackness of
space (9.16).
Because of the opacity of glass and most plastics to long-wave
thermal radiation, neither closed windows nor glass-covered or
plastic-covered solar collectors are very eff ic ient in radiating heat to
the night sky. Open windows are more effective than closed ones,
but a large proportion of what a window "sees" is usually warm trees,
earth, and su r round ing buildings, and not cold sky. The black plate
of a solar collector "sees" ma in ly sky, but it is a very ine f f ic ient cool-
ing device unless its glass covering is removed. Perhaps the most
efficacious of all simple rad iant cooling devices is water ponded on
a flat roof. The water "sees" virtually nothing but sky, and the radi-
ational cooling effect is enhanced by additional evaporative cooling
from the surface of the pond.

Further Reading

J. F. van Straaten. Thermal Performance of Buildings. New York, Elsevier, 1967.

80

10

Controllingf Air
Temperature and
Humidity

The roles of air temperature and hum id i ty in human thermal com-
fort are easily grasped. In cool air the body loses heat too quickly
for comfort, and in hot air, too slowly. We seek a happy med ium. If
the air is too hum id, skin evaporation is too slow for comfort. If the
air is too dry, the skin and the respiratory surfaces of the lungs are
dried too rapidly, and static electricity becomes a nuisance. Thus we
expect our buildings to regulate air temperature and humidity,
along with thermal radiation and air movement, within fairly close
tolerances.

Passive Control of Air Temperature and Humidity

The enclosure of a building, quite independently of any mechan-
ical heating or cooling systems, does a great deal to mod ify the
temperature and hum id i ty of the interior air. Humidity is reduced
in a well-designed building by the exclusion of both ground damp-
ness and precipitation. Beyond that, hum id i ty is dependent on
ventilation with outdoor air at a hum id i ty d i f fe rent from that of
the existing interior air, the generation of atmospheric moisture
by the building 's occupants, and the raising and lowering of air
temperature within the bu i ld ing enclosure. A rising air temperature
automatically results in a lowering of relative humidity, and a
fa l l ing temperature results in a rising hum id i ty. At times, water
vapor is taken from the air by condensing on a cold building surface
such as a w indow pane, a water pipe, a basement wall, or a concrete
floor slab, which reduces hum id i ty.

81

10.1

10.2

The air tempera ture in an unheated, uncooled bu i ld ing is
affected by a number of factors. Heat enters the bu i ld ing by means of

• the metabolic heat of its occupants (a considerable quan t i ty in
aud i to r iums, classrooms, arenas, and crowded stores);
• the heat generated by their activities (cooking, bathing, runn ing
machinery, operating lighting devices; all these are potentially
large sources);
• direct solar radiation, especially through windows and openings;
• terrestrial reradiation of solar heat;
• inward conduc t ion of heat from outside air through walls,
windows, and roof; and
• entry of warmer air from outside through windows, doors, and
ventilating systems (10.1).

Heat leaves the bu i ld ing by means of

• the exhaust or leakage of heated air to the outdoors;
• outward conduction of heat to outside air;
• radiation of heat from the bu i ld ing to cooler outdoor surround-
ings, especially the night sky; and
• the discharge of heated waste water into sewers (10.2).

The effects of these sources and flows of heat on the interior air
temperature of the bu i ld ing are highly dependent on the thermal
characteristics of the bu i ld ing enclosure. Consider the effects of just
two parameters of an enclosure, thermal resistance and thermal
capacity. From these two parameters four extreme combinations of
thermal characteristics (10.3) can be contructed through

1. high resistance, high capacity (a heavy concrete bu i ld ing
wrapped in insulation);
2. high resistance, low capacity (a well-insulated wooden building);
3. low resistance, high capacity (an un insu la ted concrete build-
ing); and
4. low resistance, low capacity (an uninsulated wooden bu i ld ing).

The air in a bu i ld ing based on combination i heats up slowly in
response to its in ternal sources of heat and reaches an equ i l ib r ium
temperature that fluctuates rather slowly and belatedly as these
sources change. It is affected relatively little by outdoor conditions.
The air in a bu i ld ing built according to combination 2 is also
affected relatively little by outdoor conditions but heats up rapidly
and its tempera ture fluctuates fa i r ly quickly. The air temperature
in a bu i ld ing whose thermal characteristics match combination
3 is strongly inf luenced by outdoor conditions, but its responses

82

are sluggish and attenuated. The uninsulated wooden building,
corresponding to combination number 4, has but a small advantage
with respect to air temperature over a wind-protected outdoor space.
Its interior air tempera ture adjusts to a value rapidly approaching the
outdoor temperature at any given time. These are oversimplified
cases, of course. Designers control many more parameters of
interior air temperature, although these two, thermal resistance and
thermal capacity, are among the most potent.
It is worth our while to examine what happens over the span of
a cold but sunny winter day to interior air temperatures in a hypo-
thetical, unheated bu i ld ing of moderately well insulated wooden
construction with a large south-facing window of double glass (10.4).
At midnight, the outdoor temperature is lower than the indoor
temperature and the interior surfaces, particularly the glass, are
therefore cooler than the indoor air. As indoor air approaches these
surfaces, it is cooled and becomes more dense. It falls along all four
walls, losing more heat as it goes, to collect as a cold stratum along
the floor. Warmer air rises in the center of the room to replace it, but

10.4

8?

10.3

it, too, is cooled in turn by the ceiling and walls and sinks at the
perimeter toward the floor. The air near the ceiling is warmer than
the air near the floor; if the room were taller, this stratification of air
temperatures would be even more pronounced. Toward dawn, the
heat stored in the air of the room and in the interior materials of the
bu i ld ing enclosure is largely exhausted, and the interior temper-
ature slowly approaches the outdoor temperature.
As the sun rises in the sky, outside air temperatures rise slightly,
and direct solar radiation warms slightly the eastward- and southward-
fac ing exterior surfaces of the bu i ld ing. Most of this new warmth is
convected from the exterior surfaces into the still-cool outdoor air,
but it does help, along with the increased outdoor air temperature,
to slow down the rate at which interior heat is conducted outward
through the walls and roof. This situation prevails throughout the
day, with continuous but moderate losses from the interior to the
outdoors. Meanwhile, sunlight is entering through the window, strik-
ing and wa rm ing parts of the interior walls and floor. These warm
surfaces heat the ad jacent a ir, wh ich rises to be replaced by descend-
ing, cooler air, which is then also heated. A new pattern of convec-
tion is set up, with an upward flow over the sun-warmed surfaces and
a downward flow where heat is lost through the walls, especially on
the cooler sides away from the sun, and down the inside su r face of
the warmer but still-cool glass. The interior air temperature rises,
reaching a peak in the early afternoon, after which the setting sun,
fa l l ing outdoor temperatures, and the night sky radiation combine
to begin a net cooling of the interior that is most rapid in the early
evening and is already growing slower by midnight.
There are several ways in which the thermal performance of this
bu i ld ing enclosure could be improved considerably. The enclosure
could be better insulated to cut down its rate of heat loss, using
either permanent insulating materials or rugs, tapestries, and cur-
tains. Heat losses could be fu r ther reduced by m in im iz ing the build-
ing's ratio of exposed surface area to enclosed volume. This could be
accomplished by reproportioning the bu i ld ing un t il it more closely
resembled a cube or, better yet, a sphere, but severe reproportioning
might force an offsetting reduc t ion in the area of glass that could
collect solar heat. Thermal performance could also be improved by
tightly sandwiching the bu i ld ing between other heated buildings
(10.5). A heavy cur ta in could be drawn across the window, or the
shutters closed, when the sun was not in the sky, to slow the outward
conduction of heat through the glass. This would make it profitable
to enlarge the window still fu r the r, to gain still more solar heat, but
such an enlargement might result in gross overheating of the space
at m idday—un le ss the thermal capacity of the bu i ld ing interior were
increased to absorb some of this daytime heat gain and hold it

84

10.5

until evening. By these means, a considerably d ifferent daily cycle of
temperatures could be achieved on those days when the sun shines.
On cloudy days, some heat is gained through the window from
the d iffuse light penetrating the clouds, but this effect is weak. The
bu i ld ing remains rather cool throughout the 24-hour cycle.

Active Heating

When a heating device is added to this simple bu i ld ing, it adds a
warm updraf t, usually of considerable strength, to the convective
circulation pattern. If the device (some coiled tubing filled with
circulating hot water, let us say) is placed in the center of the room,
where a weak upd ra ft already exists, it will accelerate the existing
pattern of circulation while gradually raising the temperature of
the air, especially near the ceiling (10.6). Cool downdrafts from the
window and wall surfaces will cross the floor before being warmed
by the coils. A better location for the heating device would be under
the window, to counter the strong downdrafts that come off the glass
and prevent them from reaching the floor (10.7). By this means, the
rapid rise of the warm air would also be slowed somewhat. A gentler
pattern of circulation would be established that avoids excessive
accumulations of warm air in the unoccupied zone near the ceiling
or of cold air in the zone around the feet and ankles of the occupants.
The higher the levels of thermal insulation in the shell of the build-
ing, the weaker these convective air movements will be, and the less
critical it becomes to locate the source of heat below a window.
The heat-producing capacity of the heating device has a great
deal to do with the level of comfort that can be achieved in the
room. If we know that the room will lose 5,000 BTU (5,000 kj) per
hour to the outdoors at a given indoor temperature and under a cer-
tain set of weather conditions, we also know that we must add 5,000
BTU (5,000 k j) per hour to the interior air to replace this loss. If this
is done with a heating device that can produce heat only at the rate
of 10,000 BTU (10,000 kj) per hour, the device needs to operate only
50 percent of the time to achieve the necessary output, using some
time pattern such as ten minutes on, ten minutes off, and so forth.
During the ten minutes the device is on, the average room temper-
ature will rise from slightly below optimum to slightly above optimum,
and the cold drafts will be effectively stopped. Dur ing the ten
minutes the device is off, the temperature will fa ll to slightly below
optimum before the device goes on again. This in itself may be
of very small consequence to the occupants' comfort; of greater
seriousness is the loss of the circulating action of the heating device
dur ing the time it is off The warmer air in the room will migrate
toward the ceiling, and the more dense cool air will flow to the floor,

85

10.6

10.7

10.8

10.9

chilling ankles, feet, and children who are playing there. It is prefer-
able to have a continuously operating heating device whose output
can be ad jus ted to 5,000 BTU (5,000 k j) per hour, so that its stirring
and mixing action can continuously prevent cold drafts and uneven
temperature distributions.

Heating Fuels

A wide variety of heating devices and systems are used today. The
most primitive and psychologically nourishing is the open fire of
wood or coal, but its heating effect is mainly radiant, and most of its
warmth, along with considerable quantities of inducted room air, is
lost up the chimney (10.8). An enclosed stove of metal or ceramic
is considerably more eff ic ient with respect to both radiation and
convection. Some modern, thermostatically controlled stoves are
highly e f f ic ient (10.9). Heat losses up the ch imney are relatively low
in stoves, but, as with open fires, considerable heat is lost through
the room air that is drawn into the flame for combustion, unless
combustion air is piped directly from outdoors to the base of the
flame. If a room has neither a separate supply of combustion air nor
enough leakage around windows and doors to supply combustion
air through the room, an open fire or stove is apt to become smoky,
and the oxygen in the room air may become seriously depleted.
Electric resistance heaters are unobtrusive, cheap to buy and
install, easy to control, can produce (in various models) any desired
mix of radiated and convected heat, need no combustion air, and
cause no loss of heated air to the outdoors. They convert electricity
to heat with complete eff ic iency. Their overriding disadvantage is
that, except where cheap hydroelectric power is available, electricity
is several times more expensive than any other available fue l. In
terms of resource utilization, when electricity is generated from
fossil fuels or nuclear energy, for every unit of heat released through
electrical resistance into a room, two or three units are discarded
into waterways and the atmosphere because of losses in electrical
generation and transmission, making electric heat, overall, roughly
half as eff ic ient in terms of fuel consumption as is the direct com-
bustion of fuel in heating devices inside the building.
Coal was once the preferred fuel in central heating systems. It is
relatively d i f f icu lt to distribute from mines to buildings, however,
and d i f f icu lt to handle within buildings. Its combustion produces a
heavy, dusty ash that must be transported away for disposal. Coal is
also relatively d iff icu lt to bu rn efficiently and cleanly. For these
reasons, coal as a heating fuel has been largely supplanted in the
United States by oil and gas.
Oil fuel is much easier and cleaner to handle than coal because it
can be pumped from delivery trucks directly into a building's fuel

86

tank and drawn from the tank automatically to the bu rne r. Gas is the
cleanest and easiest fuel of all, for it is usually piped directly to the
bu rner from a main distribution pipe bur ied beneath the street.
Originally most fuel gas was produced locally by distilling coal
and was distributed through purely local networks of piping. Today
natural gas is much more common than locally produced artificial
gas and is often piped for thousands of miles directly from the well-
head to the consumer.

Solar Heating

Solar energy is attractive as a source of heat because it is free of cost,
nonpolluting, and, unlike any other fuels except wood and wind,
renewable. Its disadvantages are several: It arrives at the building site
at a very low intensity. It is available for only a fraction of the time
du r ing the heating season, because of short hours of daylight and
frequent cloudiness. And for the ma jo r i ty of existing buildings and a
large proportion of potential bu i ld ing sites, its availability is severely
limited by su r round ing buildings, trees, and geographic features and
by an unfavorable orientation of the building or bu i ld ing site with
respect to the sun.
Because of the relatively low intensity of solar radiation, large
areas of building surface must be devoted to its collection in a solar
energy system. Focusing collectors, which must move automatically
to track the daily motions of the sun, are generally too cumbersome
and expensive for use on buildings. Instead, we catch the sun either
with large areas of windows or flat-plate collector panels. Although
neither windows nor flat-plate collectors can produce the high
efficiencies and high output temperatures of focusing collectors,
either is capable of gathering useful quantities of heat at temper-
atures adequate for the comfort heating of buildings.
If windows are used to gather solar heat in the northern
hemisphere, they should be oriented within a few degrees of true
south, to catch a max imum of winter sunlight (10.10). To avoid
wintertime overheating during sunny periods and to store heat
for nights and sunless periods, thermal storage capacity must be
provided within the enclosure of the building, using large volumes
of masonry, concrete, or water, or smaller volumes of particular
chemical salts that store heat efficiently. The system will work best
if the storage materials are directly exposed to the sunlight entering
the windows. Nighttime heat losses through the glass must be
minimized by the use of insulated shutters, heavy curtains, or special
window glazing that is highly reflective of long-wave infrared. A
suitably designed roof overhang or exterior horizontal sunshade
blocks the high summer sun from entering and heating the building
while admitting the fu ll rays of the low winter sun.

87

10.10

Window-based solar heating systems usually have no moving parts
and are therefore classified as passive systems. A system that admits
sunlight directly to the occupied space of the bu i ld ing, such as
the one described above, is called a direct-gain system. Direct-gain
systems have several serious disadvantages: They allow interior air
temperatures to fluctuate over a wide range. The direct sunlight
inside the room is far too br ight for reading or other tasks. And
the sun's rays cause fad ing and deterioration of rugs, upholstery,
curtains, and wood.
One way of l im i t ing these problems is to gather solar heat with an
attached sunspace (10.11). The sunspace is fu l ly exposed to sun l ight
and becomes too hot for comfort when the sun is out. The surplus
heat is drawn into the inhabited part of the bu i ld ing by convection
or a fan. The sunspace may be used as a greenhouse or solarium,
although it is often too hot for either of these uses unless thermal
storage is added. This can take the form of a masonry wall, containers

10.11

88

10.12

of water, or a subfloor bed of rocks through which sun-heated air is
drawn either by convection or an electric fan.
Another approach is to place a heavy wall of masonry, concrete,
or water-filled containers ju st inside the south-facing glass (10.12).
This Trombe wall (named for its inventor) shades the interior of the
bu i ld ing from the sun and absorbs and stores solar heat. When the
air in the bu i ld ing is cooler than the wall, it gains heat from the wall.
All these approaches to passive solar heating add substantial cost
to the building for additional window area, thermal storage, and
insulating window closures. None of them gives very close control of
interior air temperature. None will eliminate the need for a conven-
tional heating system to provide comfort du r ing long cloudy spells.
With the additional money that would be spent on passive solar
heating, one can add considerable thermal insulation to the ceil-
ings, walls, and floors of a bu i ld ing, and install a moderate area
of very eff ic ient windows, preferably fac ing south to collect small
but useful amounts of solar heat. This superinsulated, sun-tempered
approach can result in a bu i ld ing that uses about the same amount
of heating fuel as a passive solar bu i ld ing while offer ing better con-
trol of air temperature and direct sunlight.
Active solar heating systems generally pump either air or l iqu id
through flat-plate collectors to carry away the absorbed heat (10.13).
The heat is stored in l iqu id, rocks, or salts in an insulated container
inside the building, from which it may be withdrawn as necessary by
the building's heat distribution system. The collectors are usually
installed at an angle that is calculated to lie approximately perpen-
d icu lar to the midwinter noontime rays of the sun. The construction
of the collector can be quite simple: one or two cover plates of glass
or plastic adm it the sunlight and trap its heat; a dark-colored metal

89

10.13

surface absorbs the heat; air or l iqu id traverses interior pipes or ducts
that are attached to the metal surface to carry away the heat; and an
insulated back on the collector m in im izes the waste of heat.
It is virtually impossible to design an active solar heating system
that can provide all the heat required by a bu i ld ing under all weather
conditions. A series of cloudy days in m idw in ter can exhaust the
useful heat from even the largest storage container. As with a passive
solar heating system, a backup heating system is requ ired, using
fossil fue l, wood, or electricity for fuel. The backup system must have
su f f ic ient capacity to heat the building dur ing a prolonged sunless
period. This means that it is as expensive to install as is a heating
system in a similar bu i ld ing with no solar heating system. Thus it
is inherently much more expensive to construct a bu i ld ing with
an active solar heating system than without it. As with passive solar
heating, better insulation of the bu i ld ing can often achieve the same
heating fuel savings at the same or lower initial cost.

Wind Energy

Wind energy, though it is most abundant in the cold months of
the year and is often available at night, is unlikely to be a feasible
alternative to solar or fossil-fuel heating in most buildings. Aside
from its sporadic na ture, wind is simply too d i f fu se an energy source
and too d i f f icu lt to capture. Even a small, well-insulated dwelling
requires a very large w indm i l l, d i f f icu lt to ma in ta in and sub ject to
storm damage, to generate enough energy for wintertime heat in a
temperate climate. The cost of the mill would be of the same order
of magnitude as the cost of the dwelling.

90

Heat Distribution

Several d ifferent media can be used to distribute heat from a central
source to the various spaces in a building. Steam was once popular
and remains in use in many buildings today. It is produced in a boiler,
circulated under pressure through insulated pipes, and condensed
in cast-iron "radiators" (in reality, their effect is largely convective),
in which the latent heat of the steam's vaporization is released to the
air of the room. The condensate is then pumped back to the boiler
through a network of re turn pipes (10.14). Steam heating systems are
reasonably efficient, but they are difficult to control precisely be-
cause of the rapidity with which the condensing steam gives off heat.
Hot-water distribution, commonly called hydronic heating, is
much easier to control (10.15). ^ involves the circulation of much
greater quantities of water than in a steam system, because only the
sensible heat of the water is transmitted to the air, not the copious
latent heat of vaporization. But by regulating both the temperature
of the water and its rate of circulation, a very even and controlled
release of heat to the air can be achieved, resulting in a high degree
of comfort for the occupants. Hot-water systems are silent when
properly installed and adjusted.

10.14

10.15

91

Warm-air systems for the distribution of heat are not as quiet
as hot-water systems are, especially if high air velocities are used.
Unless constantly ma in ta ined, they can c ircu la te dust as well as air
through a bu i ld ing. Their ductwork is bulky and d i f f icu lt to house,
compared with water or steam piping. But warm-air systems have
strong advantages: Control of comfort conditions can be at least as
good as with hot-water systems, through the simultaneous control of
air temperature and air volume, and especially through the greater
ability of the moving stream of air to stir and redistribute the air in a
room. This is par t icu lar ly important in tall spaces where excessive
stratification might otherwise be a problem. Air systems have the
fu r ther attribute of being able to incorporate filtration, hum id i f ica-
tion, ventilation, and cooling func t ions, using the same ductwork.
Any desired proportion of fresh outdoor air can be added to the
circulated air at the fu rnace, and in hot weather, the bu rner can be
shut off and cooling coils activated for the circulation of cold air.
The central warm-air system originated simply as a large stove in
the middle of the basement, with grilles in the floors above to allow
the heat from the stove to convect to upper levels of the building.
The uneven temperatures and airflows of this system were improved
by the addition of supply-and-return ductwork, by means of which
convecting air could be directed to the places where it was most
needed. With the fu r th er add i t ion of a fan to drive the air, ducts are
reduced to a more manageable size and hulk; filters can be installed
at the fu rnace to clean the air as it circulates; and better mixing of
room air is possible (10.16).

Cooling Systems

Either of two basic systems may be employed to produce cool air in
buildings. The most commonly used is the compression cycle, in which
a gaseous working fluid, usually a chlorofluorocarbon, is compressed
and l iqu i f ied. This causes the fluid to become very hot. The hot fluid
passes through a coil of copper tubing (10. 17). In residential-scale
systems, this hot-side coil is cooled by blowing outdoor air past it
with a fan. In large-building cooling systems, the heat from the hot-side
coil is absorbed by pump ing water past the coil. The heated water is
pumped to an outdoor cooling tower, either on the rooftop or along-
side the building, where it trickles over an open latticework against
a current of fan-blown outdoor air. This causes the water to release
heat to the air through both evaporation and convection, a combina-
tion that is considerably more powerful than the convective-only
cooling of the residential-scale system. The water from the bottom of
the cooling tower, having lost the heat that it had absorbed from the
coil of hot fluid, is pumped back to the coil, where once again it

92

10.16

10.17

10.18

absorbs heat. Meanwhile, the compressed, cooled working fluid
(which is still slightly warm) is released through an expansion valve
into another coil of tubing where, at a lower pressure, changing from
a liquid to a gas, it becomes very cold. After vaporization is complete,
the working fluid re turns to the compressor to begin the cycle again.
Either water or air is cooled by circulating it past the cold-side
coils. It is distributed throughout the building, where it absorbs
airborne heat from occupants, machinery, lights, and bu i ld ing
surfaces before being returned for another cycle of chilling.
As an alternative to the compression cycle, an absorption cycle
may be used (10.18). A concentrated solution of a hygroscopic chem-
ical, usually l i th ium bromide salt, absorbs water by evaporating it
from a vessel. The water in the vessel becomes very cold as a result
of the evaporation. Water is chilled by circulating it through coils
in this vessel. The chilled water is circulated to cooling fixtures
throughout the building. Meanwhile, the diluted salt solution must
be continually drawn off from the absorber vessel and reconcen-
trated by boiling before it returns to renew the cycle. The steam that
boils off is condensed with water from a cooling tower and then
returns to the evaporator vessel. The heat to boil the salt solution
may be furn ished by steam or a flame fueled with gas or oil.
Notice that both these systems, the compressor and the absorp-
tion chiller, have a "hot" side and a "cold" side. For cooling we

93

10.19

circulate air or water past the cold side of the system. But it is equally
possible to harness the hot side as a source of heat in cold weather,
and this is often done. In this application such a system is known
as a heat pump (10.19). A relatively small amount of energy is used
to "pump" a relatively large amount of heat "uphill" from a colder
substance (usually water, the ground, or the outdoor air) to a warmer
substance, the air inside the bu i ld ing. Heat pumps are manufac-
tured in sizes ranging from units that may be installed in windows,
to units suitable for heating and cooling a house, to large units for
larger buildings. A heat pump is often at the heart of a total energy
system, which concentrates the waste heat from an electric generating
system to heat the same buildings that are served by the generators.

Dehumidification

When hum id summer air is cooled in the coils of an air condition-
ing system, it usually reaches a temperature below its dew point.
This raises two problems: condensed moisture must be removed
from the cooling coils, and the cooled air has an uncomfortably
high relative hum id i ty of 100 percent. The condensed water drips
from the coils into a metal pan from wh ich it is removed by drainage
piping. The humidity of the air is reduced by mixing the chilled air
with the warmer air of the bu i ld ing interior. If very close control of
hum id i ty is required, the chilled, hum id air may be passed through

94

a heating coil to raise its temperature a few degrees and reduce its
humidity before it enters the inhabited space of the building.

Air-Conditioning Systems

The simplest central air-conditioning system is a constant air volume
(CAV) system, in which a fan circulates air through heating and
cooling coils and a system of ducts that delivers it to all the rooms
in the building (10.20). The heating coils are activated only when
the building requires heat; in a small system, they often are replaced
by a firebox in which gas or oil is burned. The cooling coils in
a residential-scale air-conditioning system are cool-side coils of
refrigerant connected directly to the compressor. In a larger building,
the cooling coils carry water that has been chilled by refrigerant
coils from a nearby compression or absorption chiller. Electrically
controlled flaps called dampers exhaust a percentage of air from
the return ductwork and admit an equal percentage of fresh air
from outdoors to ventilate the building.
In larger buildings, a CAV system, which is controlled by a single
thermostat, is usually incapable of maintaining comfortable temper-
atures simultaneously in parts of the building that are exposed to
d ifferent amounts of sunlight and that contain d i f fe r ing amounts
of heat-producing machines such as computers. One way of over-
coming this problem is to divide the bu i ld ing into zones, each of
which has similar needs for heating and cooling, and to install a
separate CAV system for each zone, delivering hot and chilled water
to all the CAV fan rooms from a central boiler and chiller plant. In
each fan room, a fan moves air through heating and cooling coils
and circulates it through the ductwork in its zone.
A variable air volume (VAV) system allows for more individual
control of temperature than a CAV system. A VAV system closely
resembles a CAV system, but each zone of the bu i ld ing has its own
thermostat that operates a damper to control the amount of con-
ditioned air that is admitted to the local ductwork in that zone. If a
zone needs more cooling, a thermostat opens its damper and more
cool air is circulated. If it needs less, the damper will close partway,
and less air will be circulated. The fan, coils, and main ductwork are
identical to those for a CAV system.
In large buildings whose temperatures must be closely controlled
in a large number of zones or rooms, still other types of systems may
be installed. A dual duct system circulates both heated and cooled
air to a control box in each zone, where a thermostat regulates the
relative proportions of the two that are mixed and delivered to
the rooms. A terminal reheat system circulates chilled air and hot
water to each zone. The air is delivered through a thermostatically

95

10.20

controlled hot-water coil that heats the air to the desired tempera-
ture. Dual duct and terminal reheat systems are more expensive to
install and operate than are CAV or VAV systems, so their use is
usually restricted to such demanding environments as laboratories,
electronics factories, and hospital operating rooms.
Another type of system allows ind iv idual temperature control in
each room of a bu i ld ing by circulating chilled or heated water from
the central un it to the rooms. In each room, a unit ventilator on an
outside wall circulates the room air plus a percentage of fresh air
from outdoors through a filter and a water coil (10.21). When chilled
water is circulated through the coil, condensate forms on the coil
and drips off into a metal condensate pan, from which it is removed
by drainage piping.
Small, electric-powered unit air conditioners, mounted in windows
or in exterior walls, are widely used to cool both new and existing
rooms and buildings (10.22). They are easy to select, easy to install,
and easy to service or replace. However, they are not as efficient as
a large central unit, particularly if the central un it is powered by a
fuel other than electricity. And they are generally noisy and cause
unpleasant drafts in the room because of the high velocities at which
they distribute air.
In moderate climates, un it air conditioners are commonly
configured so that room air may be circulated through either the
cold-side or hot-side coils. This allows each un it to act as a heat
pump that can cool the room in hot weather and heat it in cool
weather. In very cold weather, the heating cycle cannot operate
economically because not enough heat can be "pumped" from the
cold outdoor air to the warm interior of the building, and so electric
resistance coils must be activated to take over the heating function.

Evaporative Cooling

In dry, hot climates, a simple, inexpensive evaporative cooler is often
suff ic ient to maintain comfortable conditions in a building. Air is
circulated through a wet pad, from which it absorbs moisture in the
form of water vapor (10.23). The a'r *s c°°led by the latent heat of
vaporization that it furnishes to the water. Evaporative coolers are
not effective in hum id climates, because the air is already so moist
that it does not take up very much water and the cooling effect is
correspondingly weak.
Evaporative cooling can be used to cool exterior roof surfaces
and thereby to slow or prevent the flow of solar heat through to the
rooms below. Sprays of water above the roof are most effective in
reducing roof temperatures, but a shallow pond on a flat roof works
nearly as well.

97

10.21

10.22

10.23

Humidity Control

Active control of the air's hum id i ty is often needed in con junc t ion
with its heating or cooling. In winter, heated air becomes extremely
dry, to the point that wood components of buildings and fu rn i tu re
shrink and crack excessively, leaves of plants wither, static electricity
causes unpleasant shocks, our skin becomes uncomfortably dry, and
the mucous membranes of our nose, throat, and lungs are dehy-
drated and become more susceptible to infection. These conditions
can be alleviated by introducing additional moisture into the air.
Air-temperature levels can then be reduced slightly without affect-
ing thermal comfort, because of the slower rate of evaporative heat
loss from the skin. Thus higher indoor hum id i ty in w in ter can lead
to lower heating fuel expenditures. If a warm-air heating system is used,
moisture can be added to the air as it passes through the fu rnace by
means of water sprays or absorbent pads or plates that are automatic-
ally and continuously supplied with water. With other heating sys-
tems, containers of water can be placed on convectors, or electric
hum id i fy ing units can be installed in rooms to boil or atomize water
into the a i r. High levels of indoor hum id i ty must be avoided in older
buildings because they can lead to serious condensation problems in
walls without vapor retarders and at the sills of single-glazed windows.
In summer, the outdoor air hum id i ty is often so high as to reduce
skin evaporation to uncomfortably low levels and to encourage various
types of mildew and fungus growth in buildings. When air is chilled
by a cooling device, its hum id i ty is raised, often to the point that
water condenses on the cooling coils and drips off. This is the prin-
ciple on wh ich an electric dehum id i f ier works. The same phenom-
enon occurs, as we have seen, in an air-conditioning system in
which moisture must be continually dra ined from the cooling coils.
Air moisture can play an important role in the hab i tab i l i ty of out-
door spaces. A splashing foun ta in or a lawn sprinkler can percepti-
bly chill dry outdoor air by vaporizing water into it. Golf courses,
sidewalk restaurants, and other inhabited outdoor areas in desert
climates are sometimes cooled with nozzles that generate mists. On
the other hand, in areas where mosquitoes are a problem, a warm,
dry, sunny lawn or courtyard fu rn ishes an environment that does
not appeal to mosquitoes, whereas a sprinkled lawn or damp garden
brings them in swarms.

Further Reading

Ben jam in Stein and John Reynolds. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for
Buildings (gth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2000, pp. 371-527.

Edward Mazria. The Passive Solar Energy Book. Emmaus, Penn., The Rodale
Press, 1979.

98

11

Controlling Air
Movement

Clean, oxygen-rich air for breathing is the most pressing environ-
mental requ irement for human life. Continuously moving air is also
a primary requirement for thermal comfort, to convect away excess
body heat and evaporate perspiration. Although the air in a rural
outdoor environment contains such natural pollutants as odors,
bacteria, pollens, spores, molds, and dust, we usually perceive it as
being pure, and all but the most allergic persons find it optimum for
breathing.
Air movement in the outdoors varies over a broad range. On the
occasional summer day when there is little or no wind, a sweltering,
suffocating, claustrophobic sensation is felt. A light breeze has a
pleasant, exhilarating, cooling effect. With increasing wind velocity,
convective and evaporative heat losses from the skin can become
excessive, particularly if the weather is cold. At very high wind
velocities, chilling of the body is extreme; respiration may become
d iff icu l t; solid objects are picked up and carried by the wind; and
structural damage to trees and buildings is likely.
In cities, manufac tured pollutants crowd the air: carbon mono-
xide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, su lfur dioxide,
hydrogen sulfide, soot, ash, dust, and odors. Most of these sub-
stances are generated by the combustion of fuels in vehicles and
heating plants, and others are given off by industrial processes.
In the confined spaces of buildings, air loses some of its oxygen
and gains carbon dioxide through repeated respiration by human
lungs. Bacteria and viruses accumulate. Odors build up from sweat-
ing, smoking, toilet functions, cooking, and industrial processes.
Gaseous pollutants such as radon and formaldehyde may be given
off by building materials. The vapor content of the air is raised
by breathing, sweating, bathing, cooking, washing, drying, and

99

unventilated gas-burning appliances. Dust and d i rt particles float
suspended in the air. The temperature of the indoor air may rise above
comfortable levels because of solar heat gain, electric lighting, body
heat, or the incidental heat given off by industrial processes, cook-
ing, or washing. Air movement is restricted by the walls, floors, and
ceilings of the buildings and may become uncomfortably sluggish.
Thus bu i ld ings requ ire ventilation systems to ensure an op t imum
velocity of air movement inside and to dilute and replace con-
taminated air with new air of acceptable temperature, dryness, and
cleanliness.
At the same time, the air in buildings often contains odors that
we find pleasant, such as the aroma of baking bread, the scent of
flowers, or the evocative pungency of incense in a cathedral, and
too-rapid ventilation can spoil the experience. But in buildings that
are especially prone to dampness or na tural overheating, or in rooms
that generate heat and odor, such as restaurant kitchens, gymnasium
locker rooms, bars, chemistry laboratories, livestock barns, audi-
toriums, or foundries, rapid rates of air replacement are necessary.
Lower rates are usually su f f ic ient for most residential occupancies,
lightly occupied offices, warehouses, and light manu fac tu r ing
plants. Regardless of the volumetric rate of ventilation, however,
indoor air speeds must not be so high as to blow belongings about
the room (11.1).

Natural Ventilation

Any bu i ld ing ventilation system, from the simplest to the most com-
plex, has four basic components:

1. An air source of acceptable temperature, moisture content,
and cleanliness
2. A force to move the air through the inhab i ted space of the
bu i ld ing
3. A means of controlling the volume, velocity, and direction of
the a irf low
4. A means of recycling or disposing of contaminated air

The simplest ventilation system in buildings is an inadvertent one:
it utilizes the outdoor air as its source, the wind as its motive
force, the cracks and seams on the windward side of the building
as orifices that introduce the fresh air at a controlled velocity and
volume, and the leeward cracks and seams as orifices that leak stale
indoor air back to the outdoors (11.2). In tightly constructed build-
ings, this infiltration ventilation is slow, but in buildings with loose-
fitting windows and doors, it can become excessive under w indy

100

11.1

11.2

outdoor conditions, causing drafty rooms and wasting energy in
cold weather through the leakage of heated air to the outdoors. In
general, infiltration should be minimized by the weatherstripping of
doors and windows, the provision of a continuous air barrier around
the perimeter of a building, and the airtight sealing of construction
seams. Even when such measures are employed, some air leakage is
inevitable, but it func t ions as a useful, minimum-level air replace-
ment system for a simple building.
Most schemes for natural ventilation of buildings use windows
to control the volume, velocity, and direction of airflow. For this
reason, most types of windows are designed to be adjustable to any
degree of openness. In most areas, an insect screen must be incor-
porated into every opening window, to keep out bugs, birds, and
small animals while still admitting air and light. Where security is a
potential problem, as in banks, jails, mental hospitals, and buildings
in high-crime areas, steel bars or heavy metal screens may also be
fitted to the openings.
Various patterns of window operation have particular advantages:
A casement window opens to the full area of the window opening,
and its swinging sash can func t ion to divert passing breezes into
the room (11.3). A double-hung window can open to only half its full
area, but the half can be at the top, the bottom, or a part of each
(11.4). An awning window or horizontal pivoting window admits
air while keeping out rain, a func t ion that other window types can
perform only if protected by a broad roof overhang or a separate
awning (11.5).

11.5

101

11.3

11.4

11.6

11.7

11.8

E i ther or both of two motive forces may be employed for na tural
ventilation: one is convection and the other is wind. Air flows
through a bu i ld ing because of the tendency of air to migrate from a
higher-pressure area to a lower-pressure one. In convective ventila-
tion, d ifferences in pressure are created by the d ifference in density
between warmer air and cooler air, which causes warm air to rise
(11.6,11.7). In wind-powered ventilation, the air flows from a higher-
pressure area in one side of a bu i ld ing to a lower-pressure area on
another. For wind-powered ventilation, it is most e f f ic ient to have
windows on at least two sides of a room, preferably in opposite walls
(11.8). Where only a single wall abuts the outdoors, a casement
window can be he lp ful in creating a pressure d ifferen t ial that
induces interior a irf low (11.9). The bu i ld ing should be sited and
configured in such a way as to best intercept the winds prevailing
in the seasons when ventilation is most necessary.
The rate of convective ventilation is proportional to the square
root of both the vertical distance between openings and the
d ifference in temperature between incoming and outgoing a i r.
Openings must be relatively large, as convective forces are not
usually so strong as w ind forces. Impediments to airflow, such as
insect screens, should be eliminated wherever possible. It is often
desirable to design for both wind and convection, placing some
openings low on the windward side and some high on the leeward
side of the bu i ld ing, to allow both sources to work together.
Openings other than windows are often used for na tural ventila-
tion. Roof ventilators, roof monitors, and opening skylights are

11.9

1021C

especially useful (11.10). Some types of roof ventilators are designed
to be spun by the wind, creating a centrifugal flow to draw air
from the room below. Others rely on convective flow or a hood
shaped to cause the wind to create an area of low pressure behind
the hood that draws interior air up and out. In any of these devices,
control dampers are advisable to reduce or close off the opening
as required.
A door ought not to be relied on for essential bu i ld ing ventilation,
unless it is provided with a doorstop or other mechanism to hold it
open at any desired angle. Otherwise a door is incapable of control-
ling the amount of air flowing past it.

Ventilation of Combustion Products

Fuel-burning devices such as stoves, furnaces, and fireplaces require
oxygen for combustion. This oxygen is often drawn from the room
in which the device is located. If the device has no flue or chimney,
products of combustion will mix with the room air to replace the
oxygen consumed by the flame. A gas cookstove works in this way,
consuming oxygen and releasing carbon dioxide and water vapor
into the air of the kitchen. Some gas-burning fireplace units are
designed to release their combustion products into the room.
Although they have safety devices to protect against the release of
toxic combustion products, many bu i ld ing professionals advise
against their use.
Devices that consume larger quantities of fue l—espec ia l ly fuels
other than natural gas, many of which produce toxic gases as com-
bustion p roduc t s—mu st be provided with chimneys. A chimney is a
convection-driven, vertical ventilation tube powered by heat of the
combustion products that it exhausts to the outside air. Thus the
room that fu rn ishes the oxygen for the flame of a device connected
to a chimney is left at a reduced air pressure with respect to the out-
doors, a d i f fe ren t ial that causes outdoor air to be sucked in through
any available cracks or openings. The result is a continuous and
often surprisingly large d ra ft of outdoor air through the room. In
warm weather this draft may be welcome, but in cold weather it
negates a considerable portion of the heating effect of the fuel-
consuming device on the room. If the cracks and openings through
which the air enters are plugged, the fire will become sluggish and
smoky, and the chimney will refuse to work properly, leading to
a depletion of oxygen and a bu i ldup of smoke in the room itself, a
situation that is both uncomfortable and dangerous. The solution is
to provide a duct that allows sufficient outdoor air for combustion to
be drawn directly from the outdoors to the base of the fire, w i thout
passing through the room.

103

11.10

Controlling Air Movement Around Buildings

Outside a bu i ld ing, a designer's concern with na tural air movement
is usually one of reducing the speed of the w ind. In streets, on side-
walks, or in courtyards, yards, plazas, gardens, playgrounds, parks,
or patios, wind velocities must often be reduced if the area is to
be habitable, even in warm weather (11.11). In w in ter in northern
climates, d r i f t ing snow f requen t ly presents problems where wind
blows around and between buildings. Wintertime heat losses from
a bu i ld ing are greatly increased by w ind, due partly to the greater
infiltration of air and partly to the more efficient transfer of heat
between the exterior skin of the bu i ld ing and the rapidly moving
outdoor air. When for any of these reasons wind speeds around
buildings must be reduced, the most effective protective device is
a long, high barr ier erected perpendicular to the direction of the
wind and upwind from the building or outdoor area to be sheltered
(11.12). A solid barr ier such as a wall creates a small area of relative
calm in its wake. Porous barr iers and shelter belts of evergreen trees
are especially effective, allowing through just enough low-velocity
air to fill the low-pressure area beh ind and divert the full force of
the wind for a considerable distance (11.13).
Tall buildings create particularly severe wind problems. Natural
wind velocities increase with height above the ground. This exposes
the upper stories of a tall bu i ld ing to strong forces that may disrupt
the cladding of the building. These wind forces also requ i re careful
consideration when bracing the building against lateral structural
loadings. At ground level around a tall building, exceptionally strong
wind currents are created by the rapid movement of air from the
high-pressure w indwa rd side of the bu i ld ing to the low-pressure
areas beh ind. If an open space is provided beneath a tall bu i ld ing
at ground level, the flow of air through the opening will be so rapid
as to make walking d i f f icu lt when winds are moderate to strong,
and doors in the opening either will not open or will open with

11.13

104

11.11

11.12

11.14

destructive force when unlatched (11.14). Ground-level wind prob-
lems can be largely avoided either by providing very large openings
completely through the building a story or two above the ground
or by using pro jec t ing horizontal roofs at this level to direct the
strongest wind currents around the bu i ld ing before they can reach
the ground (11.15). Neighboring buildings create local anomalies
in wind flow that make extensive wind-tunnel testing advisable
before constructing any tall bu i ld ing in order to determine the fu ll
structural loads that must be resisted by the skin and skeleton of the
building as well as any ground-level wind problems that could
bedevil pedestrians and drivers.

Mechanical Ventilation

Built-in fans are useful for room ventilation when reliable, positive
a irf low is requ ired (11.16). In residential kitchens and baths, simple

105

11.15

fans dump interior air directly or through a short run of ductwork to
the outdoors (11.17). This air must be replaced by air leaking in from
outdoors in various parts of the house. When the house is being
heated or cooled, this involves a considerable loss of energy, so that
such fans should be used as little as possible.
Fans in more elaborate ventilation systems are connected to twin
systems of ductwork for better air distribution throughout the build-
ing (11.18). One system of ducts pulls away stale air wh i le another
distributes clean a ir. Such systems are usually combined with heat-
ing and cooling systems in such a way that the clean air is distributed
at a proper temperature for thermal comfort. Except in buildings where
high hazards of chemical, bacterial, or radioactive contamination
exist, these systems filter and recirculate most of the interior air they
take in, continuously adding a predetermined fraction of outside air
and exhausting a similar frac t ion to the outdoors. The ma jo r i ty of
the heating or cooling energy that has previously been expended on
the air can be recovered by means of a regenerative wheel, a rotating
device made of metal mesh that uses its large thermal capacity to
transfer heat from one duct into another (11.19), or by means of an
air-to-air heat exchanger (11.20). The mesh in the regenerative wheel
is warmed in w in ter by outgoing air in the exhaust duct, then
releases this heat to incoming air when it rotates into the supply
duct. In summer, the same process cools incoming a i r. The air-to-air
heat exchanger shown here passes outgoing air through a number of
very thin passages that alternate with passages that carry incoming
air. Heat passes through the walls of the passages from the warmer
air to the cooler.
An alternative scheme for the ventilation of buildings employs
one or more un it ventilating fans at the outside wall of each room

11.18

106

11.16

11.17

11.19

11.20

to circulate the room air and replace a fraction of it with outdoor air.
A window or through-the-wall air conditioner works in this way, as
do central heating or cooling systems that use coils of hot or chilled
water to temper the air in room ventilation units.
Air is usually filtered in a building 's ventilating devices by means
of a thin, porous pad of fiber that traps dust particles from the air that
is blown through it. Much better dust filtration can be achieved
with electrostatic filters, which first add a static electric charge to the
particles in the air and then pass the air across metal plates that hold
the opposite charge. The dust particles are drawn to the plates and
held there.
Most odors can be absorbed by activated charcoal filtration. The
air may also be "scrubbed" with sprays of water to remove dust in some
large ventilation systems. Many bacteria can be killed by employing
ultraviolet lamps to irradiate the air. Such lamps need not be in
the ductwork but are often placed directly in the rooms they serve,
particularly in institutional kitchens, sickrooms, and overcrowded
dwellings, where they are effective deterrents to airborne disease.
Because eyes and skin are damaged by ultraviolet light, ultraviolet
lamps must be mounted high in the room and shielded from sight.

Natural Air Renewal

Na ture renews outdoor air in many ways. Sunlight kills bacteria in
the air. Green plants remove carbon dioxide and replenish oxygen.
Rainfall washes the air, and gravity draws out the heavier particulate

107

contaminants. Wind mixes and transports the air, d i lu t ing and dis-
tr ibu t ing contaminants. The microscopic ha irs on the surfaces of
plant leaves catch and hold airborne dust. But there is a limit to the
efficacy of these processes, especially when climatic conditions are
not ideal. It is important that we not ask too much of the atmosphere
as a converter of air contaminants. Fuel bu rn ing must be m in im ized
through energy conservation and through as much use as possible
of nonpo l lu t ing sources such as hydroelectric and solar energies.
Combustion devices must be made and ma in ta ined in such a way
as to bu rn cleanly and thoroughly. Fuels that do not bu rn cleanly
must be preprocessed to remove contaminants, or filters must be
installed in the chimneys to trap the contaminants after combus-
tion. Indus tr ial air exhausts should be filtered for chemicals and
kitchen exhausts for grease, so that only easily biodegradable gases
reach the atmosphere. Exhaust and inlet openings in any group
of bu i ld ings need to be located in such a way that they work with
prevailing winds and do not mix outgoing air with incoming a i r.
City streets must be kept broad and open enough so that they are
con t inua l ly flushed by the w ind.
Despite all these measures, our buildings produce massive
amounts of carbon dioxide and release it into the atmosphere. They
do this by bu rn ing hydrocarbon fue l, both w i th in the bu i ld ing and
at remote power plants that produce electricity for the buildings.
Carbon dioxide, once thought to be benign, is now known to be a
pr imary cause of the greenhouse effect, 
the trapping of solar heat by
the earth's atmosphere. This effect is apparently causing a warm ing
of the earth that will have disastrous effects such as severe weather,
melting of polar ice caps and subsequent flooding, and melting
of glaciers. Ultimately, we must find ways to release energy that do
not also release carbon dioxide.
It is of utmost importance that we ma in ta in and increase our
inventory of lawns, gardens, forests, meadows, cultivated fields, and
clean waterways, in which reside the green plants that consume car-
bon dioxide and produce atmospheric oxygen. Air and sun l ight are
the only necessary substances that enter our buildings free of charge,
but even they are not totally free. That is, they are obtained at the
cost of hum an vigilance to ensure that they will always be available.

Further Reading

Victor Olgyay. Design with Climate. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press,
!973> PP- 94-H2.

Benjamin Stein and John Reynolds. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for
Buildings (gth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2000, pp. 331-69.

108

12

Keeping? Water Out

Elaborate and expensive precautions are taken in buildings to prevent
the entry of even a drop or two of water, because water is an agent
of destruction. Water chills the skin, destroys the insulating value
of clothing and building fabr ic, and raises the moisture content of
the air in buildings to unhea l thy levels. Water is the universal
solvent, dissolving many materials used in building interiors and
encouraging the staining or corrosion of others. Water is a necessity
for all forms of l ife, including bacteria, molds, mildew, other fung i,
plants, and insects. A leaking building is not only uncomfortable
and unsanitary, but it is also destined for an early death through
corrosion, decay, and insect attack.

A Theory ofWatertightness

In order for water to penetrate the enclosure of a building, three
conditions are necessary:

1. Water must be present at the surface of the enclosure.
2. There must be an opening in the enclosure through which the
water can pass.
3. There must be a force to move the water through the opening.

These conditions are so simple as to be self-evident, yet they
constitute a complete basis for the systematic exclusion of water
from a building. Unless all three conditions are satisfied, water
cannot enter. By eliminating any of the three conditions at a given
location on the bu i ld ing enclosure, a watertight condition can be
ensured.

109

The Presence of Water
Water is present in and around a bu i ld ing in many guises. Rain and
snow impinge directly on the skin of a building and collect on the
ground around it, bringing surface runoff and subsurface water into
contact with its foundations. Water can be tracked into a bu i ld ing
by people or vehicles. Inside a bu i ld ing, atmospheric moisture can
condense on cold surfaces and d r ip onto the floor. Piping, p lumb ing
fixtures, cooking, washing, bathing, and industrial processes may
cause leakage or spillage of water. Bu i ld ing materials that are put in
place wet, such as concrete, brickwork, tile work, and plaster, release
large amounts of water vapor as they dry, f requen t ly causing copious
condensate to run from windows and cold-water pipes.

Openings
Buildings are amply provided with openings through wh ich water
can pass. Some, such as movement joints, jo in ts between pieces
of cladding materials, and cracks around doors and window sashes,
are intentional. Other openings are un in ten t ional but inevitable:
shrinkage cracks in concrete, lapses in workmanship, defects in
materials, holes for pipes and wires, and cracks and holes created by
the deterioration of bu i ld ing materials over time.

Forces That Can Move Water
Water can be driven to penetrate a bu i ld ing by any of a number of
forces. Gravity constantly pulls water downward and causes hydro-
static pressures where water is allowed to accumulate to any depth.
Air pressure differentials caused by wind action can drive water in
any direction, inc lud ing uphill. Capillary action can pull water in
any direction through porous materials or narrow cracks. Even the
momentum of a fa l l ing ra indrop is suff ic ient to drive the drop and its
spatter deep into an opening.
The problem of preventing water penetration is aggravated in
many cases by the wintertime freez ing of water into ice. Ice may
clog normal drainage paths and cause ponding of water on roof or
ground. The expansion that occurs du r ing the transformation of
water into ice can open paths through the building enclosure and
is a common factor in several k inds of bu i ld ing deterioration.
Let us examine a building, starting from the top and moving to
the bottom, to see what sorts of strategies are employed to prevent
water penetration.

Roofs

A roof that is dead level or that rises at a slope of less than one in four
sheds water slowly and therefore offers max imum opportunity for

no

water penetration. Such low-slope roofs are commonly covered with
a continuous, impervious membrane. This may consist of layers of
felt bedded in tar or asphalt, metal sheets soldered together, sheets of
synthetic rubber or plastic heat-fused or cemented tightly together, a
synthetic rubber compound applied in liquid form, or, in primitive
buildings in relatively dry climates, a thick layer of clay soil. These
continuous roof membranes, seemingly the simplest and most fool-
proof way to keep out water, constitute in reality the least reliable
roofing mechanisms that we can employ. They are highly suscep-
tible to puncture, especially from materials or tools dropped du r ing
construction. They are exposed to extreme thermal stress from sum-
mer sun, winter cold, daytime-nighttime temperature shifts, and
air temperature differentials between indoors and outdoors. Some-
times they crack from the resulting thermal movement. They are
incapable of passing water vapor, which sometimes leads to blister-
ing and rupture of the membrane. A slight hole in the membrane
caused by any of these mechanisms is likely to admit prodigious
quantities of water into the building, because water drains slowly, if
at all, from a low-slope roof, and slow drainage presents max imum
opportunities for gravity and capillary forces to do their work. Never-
theless, there is often no alternative to a membrane roof, and if care
is taken during construction, thermal movement joints are provided
at appropriate intervals, and a warm-side vapor retarder is installed
to avoid problems of vapor pressure, a membrane roof can give long
and satisfactory service.
A steep roof, one that slopes at a substantial angle, is much easier
to waterproof than a low-slope roof. The steeper the slope is, the faster
the water will run off, the less likely it is that the wind will drive
water up the slope of the roof, and the easier it is to keep out water.
Almost any material will shed water if it slopes steeply enough, as
can be proved by holding a washcloth or flat sponge under a water
faucet at various inclinations. Whatever material is used on steep
roofs, it is usually installed in small units known as shingles.
Shingles of many materials—slate, limestone, wood, asphalt-
impregnated felt, fired clay, sheet metal—are used in different
parts of the world. Each shingle is a small unit, easily handled and
applied by the roofer, easily replaced later if defective, and free to
adjust to thermal or moisture stresses in the roof structure. Each
shingle allows water to pass off three of its four sides under the forces
of gravity and wind, but the shingles are laid in such a way that the
next lower shingles catch and drain the water quickly in turn, and
so on to the lower edge of the roof (12.1). The weakness of a shingle
roof is its susceptibility to water driven up the slope or across the
slope by a very strong wind. This is countered by a twofold
strategy of providing a sheet material beneath the shingles, usually

111

12.1

12.2

asphalt-impregnated felt paper, to block the passage of air through
the roof plane, and by sloping the roof steeply enough that a larger
component of gravity is brought into play against the upward flow
of water. Through experience, safe m i n im um roof slopes have
been determined for shingles of various materials under various
wind conditions, and leakage is un l ike ly even in a heavy storm if
these criteria are satisfied. In windswept locations—seashores and
moun ta in top s— it is often wise to use even steeper slopes than those
recommended or to increase the overlap of the shingles.
The adhesive force of water is utilized as the ma jor water-resisting
mechanism of a thatch roof '(12.2). If a thick layer of straw, leaves, or
reeds slopes at a su f f ic ient angle, the drops of water adhere to the
fibers and run downward along them to the lower edge of the roof,
just as water can be transferred from a beaker to a test tube in the
laboratory by pouring it along a glass rod. A thatch roof absorbs
considerable water and must dry out between storms to m in im ize
decay. Therefore, thatch is never laid over a solid roof surface
but instead is tied to spaced, horizontal poles or strips of wood over
a well-ventilated attic. The sheer thickness of the layer of tightly
packed stalks is suff ic ient to dissipate wind energy that might other-
wise drive rain through without the use of a sheet material beneath.
On one- and two-story buildings, broad roof overhangs can shelter
walls and windows from rain. The walls of taller structures cannot
be protected from direct attack directly by rain, mak ing roof over-
hangs superf luous.
Edges of roofs are particularly problematic. Water may creep
under the roofing material or penetrate the tops of parapet walls:
The problem is worse on steep roofs and some low-slope roofs
because all the water gathered by the roof drains to the edges of
the roof for disposal. In most cases, steep roofs simply lap over the
walls, so that the roof water drips well outside the wall, a simple and
effective expedient. The dr ipp ing roof runoff erodes the soil below,
however, often enabling water to penetrate into the basement, wash-
ing away soil from around and beneath foundations, and spattering
earth onto the bu i ld ing walls. At a m in imum, a trench filled with
gravel should be provided beneath the eave to prevent erosion and
provide drainage (12.3).
An alternative approach to is to catch the roof-edge runoff in
gutters. The gutters slope slightly to drain into vertical pipes called
downspouts or leaders, which in turn discharge either onto splash
blocks, into a mun ic ipal storm sewer network, or into dry wells
(gravel-filled pits) to be absorbed by the ground. But such systems
tend to clog with leaves, dirt, pine needles, and other debris and are
a nuisance to clean, a problem that can be alleviated somewhat by
installing coarse screening over the gutters.

112

12.3

Snow causes particular problems at the edges of steep roofs in
cold climates. One problem is caused by snow's tendency to slide
off, tearing away gutters and endangering people and objects below.
It is better to reduce the danger by holding the snow on the roof
with small metal or wood fences installed for that purpose (12.4).
Furthermore, snow is a fa ir ly good thermal insulator, and heating
fuel can be saved by retaining it in place. The supporting roof struc-
ture must be strong enough to hold a considerable depth of snow
without distress.
A second problem is caused by the melting of snow on steep roofs,
especially where the thermal insulation of the building is inade-
quate. Heat passing from the warm interior of the building gradually
melts the snow from beneath. The snowmelt water runs down the
roof until it reaches the overhang and the gutter, which are much
cooler than the roof over the interior spaces, and in many cases
colder than the freezing temperature of water. The water refreezes
into ice on the overhang, clogging the downspout and gutter. A pool
of water collects above this ice dam (12.5). Unfortunately, shingled
roofs are not resistant to standing water. The water penetrates around
and under the shingles and is often first noticed when it discolors
the interior wall surfaces and drips from the heads of the window
openings just under the roof. The remedies for ice dams are
improved attic insulation and also ventilation openings under the
eaves and at the roof ridge, to carry away quickly any heat that gets

113

12.4

12.5

through the insulation (12.6). If for some reason these measures are
impossible or ineffective, the last few rows of shingles at the lower
edge of the roof may be replaced by an impervious memb rane, or
electric melting cables may be installed at the eaves.
Edges of low-slope roofs may or may not overhang the walls, or
they may jo in a parapet wall (12.7,12.8). In any case, it is important
that the edge of the roof membrane be raised at least a few inches
(100 mm or more), in order to keep water from spilling over it and
down into or onto the structure beneath. The membrane is turned
in two folds of 135 degrees each with a cant strip to avoid hav ing
to make a crack-prone go-degree fold. The vertical edge of the
membrane is protected, with overlapping sheet metal flashings or is
tucked into a reglet. Rainwater may be carried away by interior roof
dra ins evenly spaced across the expanse of the roof or by scuppers
(12.7) and downspouts around the exterior walls.

12.6

12.7

n4

12.8

Walls

Walls, being vertical, are not sub ject to water pressures induced by
gravity unless a crack or jo int in the wall slopes toward the interior of
the building. Gravity, moreover, works to the advantage of walls,
stripping water off them before it has much time to penetrate. But
wind forces on walls are usua l ly much greater than those on roofs,
driving raindrops hard against wall surfaces, moving water sideways
and sometimes upward across the surfaces, and pump ing water
through even the most m inu te openings where the air pressure is
lower on the inside than on the outside. We often build walls of
more porous materials than roofs, and we invariably riddle our walls
with cracks or jo in ts between pieces of material and with holes to

"5

accommodate windows and doors, so that water penetration prob-
lems are frequen t ly encountered.
Masonry materials all absorb and transmit water to some extent.
Mortar joints that have deteriorated over the years afford particularly
easy paths for water to pass. Water adheres to the interior surfaces of
the pores of the materials, and if, as in most cases, the adhesive force
between the water molecules and the wall material is greater than
the cohesive force between the molecules themselves, the water will
be drawn in by capillary action. A strong wind can increase the
rapidity of absorption. A possible solution to this problem would be
to apply an impervious coating, such as a heavy pa int or a synthetic
rubber, to the outside face of the masonry. This would repel rain-
water quite effectively, but it would also stop the outward migration
of water vapor, thus leading to rup ture of the coating and subse-
quent peeling and leaking. The coating would also be susceptible to
tearing because of thermal movement in the underlying wall.
A more reliable approach to making a masonry wall watertight is
to assume that some water will penetrate the outer layer of masonry
but to provide a continuous gap ju st behind the outer layer to break
any capillary path that might conduct water to the interior of the
building. This is the logic of the masonry cavity wall, in which the
outer wythe (vertical layer) of stone or brick held a couple of inches
(50 or 60 mm) from the inner wythes by means of stiff metal ties
(12.9). The effectiveness of the cavity depends on keeping it free of
mortar droppings du r ing construction and providing weep holes
at f requent horizontal intervals to dra in water from the continuous
flashing at the bottom of the cavity. Sheet metal or plastic flashings
also must be installed around window and door frames to avoid
capillary paths across the cavity. An incidental benef it of the cavity
wall is that it transmits heat much more slowly than does a solid
wall, and foam plastic thermal insulation is usually installed in the
cavity to enhance this effect.
If water penetrates into brick, stone, or concrete and freezes there,
it can cause spalling, the chipping off of flakes from the surface by
the expansion of water as it freezes. Spalling was a m a jor force in the
destruction of concrete walls and pavements until it was discovered
that concrete deliberately produced to contain microscopic air
bubbles (air-entrained concrete} provides expansion space for the
water as it freezes and so virtually eliminates spalling. Obviously,
spalling can also be eliminated by keeping water off the wall with
roof overhangs or other protective devices.

Panel Walls
We often clad walls with large pieces of less porous materials such as
panels of granite or dense precast concrete, or sheets of metal or glass.

116

12.9

With these materials, the problem is not one of stopping an overall slow
seepage, as it is with masonry walls, but of preventing leakage through
the joints between pieces. Such large panels cannot be fitted tightly
together because of their relatively large amounts of thermal expan-
sion and contraction and because of the unavoidable inaccuracies
in their manufac ture and installation. Quarter-inch to three-quarter-
inch (6 mm to 19 mm) gaps must be provided on all sides of each
panel, and these gaps must be made resistant to the passage of water.
The easiest way to make these gaps watertight, though not the
most reliable, is to fill each gap with an airtight, watertight sealant,
a liquid synthetic rubber that is injected against a foam plastic
backer rod and hardens into a continuous elastic plug that adheres
to both sides of the gap. Alternatively, a molded synthetic rubber
gasket can be tucked into the gap (12.10). In theory, the sealant or
gasket expands and contracts readily with any movement of the
panels, all the while maintaining its tight seal against wind and
water. In practice, even the best sealant or gasket joints will deteri-
orate over a period of years, particularly if they are exposed to the

117

12.10

12.11

weather, and will ultimately crack or lose the ir grip on the panels.
Joints sealed with anything but the finest workmanship will fail
much sooner; often they leak from the moment they are installed.
More reliable joints between wall panels are produced by reduc-
ing or eliminating the jo in t 's dependence on a sealant material for
its water resistance. Going back to our theory of watertighttness, this
means that either water must be kept away from the jo int or the
forces that can move water through the jo int must be neutralized.
It is nearly impossible to keep water completely away from jo in ts in
walls. Thus we must tu rn our attention to neu tra l iz ing the forces
that might move the water through such joints.
The three p r ima ry forces that move water through wall jo in ts are
the momentum of imp ing ing raindrops, capillary action, and d iffer-
ential air pressures. The momen tum of ra indrops can be effectively
stopped by means of a simple labyrinth consisting of interleaving
baff les arranged in such a way that a drop cannot be thrown through
the jo int w i thout striking a surface that blocks its passage (12.11).
Notice that the baff les in a labyrinth do not touch one ano ther.
Rather, they are spaced far enough apart that a drop of water cannot
bridge between them, thus preventing capillary entry as well as
kinetic entry. It is important that labyrinth jo in ts drain freely, to get
rid of the water that they normally trap in the performance of their
func t ion. Corners and intersections of panels must be designed
especially carefully, to dra in the vertical jo in ts without flooding the
horizontal ones.
Air pressure d ifferen t ia ls are created wherever wind strikes a
bu i ld ing surface. The w indwa rd exterior face of a bu i ld ing is often at
a higher air pressure than are the rooms just behind that face. Under
this condition, water present in a j o i nt in the wall, even a labyrinth
jo in t, can be carried into the bu i ld ing by the force of moving air. In
order to stop the movement of air through the jo in t, we could apply
a sealant to the exterior edges of the jo in t, but any imperfection in
the sealant would allow a stream of moving air to carry water into the
bu i ld ing (12.12). If instead we apply the sealant to the interior edges
of the jo in t, the sealant will be exposed to air but not to water, which
is excluded by the labyr in th. Even if the sealant is defective, for
example, if it does not adhere perfectly to one side of the jo in t, only
small volumes of air are likely to pass, not enough to transport water
through the labyrinth. Furthermore, the sealant jo int in this case is
protected from the deteriorating effects of sunlight and water and, if
suitably detailed, is accessible from inside the bu i ld ing for inspec-
tion and maintenance. A reliably waterproof jo int is thus achieved
with a m in imum of means.
The same effect can be achieved without the use of sealant by
providing a con t inuous layer of air beh ind a facade of unsealed,

118

labyrinth-jointed exterior panels to create a wall that works by the
rainscreen principle. The backup wall behind the airspace must be
airtight, must be sealed to the panels around the edges of the facade,
and must be strong enough structurally to resist the expected wind
pressures on the bu i ld ing. Very small amounts of air passing back
and forth through the joints serve to ma in ta in the air pressure in the
airspace at exactly the same level as the wind pressure outside at any
instant. This effectively eliminates any air-induced movement of
water through the joints. In this arrangement, the panels form a
rainscreen to divert raindrops. The backup wall forms an air barrier.
The space between is a pressure equalization chamber (PEC) that
prevents the formation of air pressure differentials between the
inside and outside of the jo in ts in the rainscreen (12.13). The backup
wall can be made very s imp ly—of concrete blocks surfaced with an
airtight mastic, for example, or of light wood or steel f ram ing with
sheathing panels covered by an air barr ier of asphalt-impregnated
building paper cemented together at the seams.
In the example of rainscreen cladding shown here (12.14), a
multistory bu i ld ing is faced with panels of thick sheet a lum inum.
No joint sealant is used. The open joints between the panels are
configured so that they systematically neutralize all the forces that
might move water through them. Gravity is defeated by sloping the
horizontal surfaces of the joints toward the outdoors. Capillary

12.12

Principle of the Rainscreen
Wind pressure F| = ?Zl pressure in PEC
Therefore wind cannot force water
through joints in rainscreen.

12.13
12.13

119

12.14

action is eliminated by keeping the panels a su f f ic ient distance apart
at the joints. Labyrinth joints keep out water that is carried by
momentum. Air pressure differentials are neutralized by the pres-
sure equalization chamber behind the panels. The PEC is divided
into compartments by the horizontal a lum inum components at
each floor line and by the a lum inum ribs that support the vertical
edges of the panels. This compartmentation is desirable because

120

wind pressures vary considerably across the face of a building,
particularly near the corners and the top edge. If the PEC were not
compartmented, air could rush through it from an area of higher
pressure to one of lower pressure, drawing water through the joints
in the higher-pressure area. The PEC should be allowed to drain
freely at the bottom to rid itself of any water that might somehow get
past the rainscreen.
The rainscreen principle can be applied effectively even to very
small exterior details such as door and window frames (12.15). The
exterior sill should have a sloping top surface, or wash, to divert
water away from the door or sash, and it should project over the
wall below, with a groove called a drip to prevent clinging water
from working its way back into the wall beneath the sill. A capillary
break should be provided where the sash meets the sill, to keep
water from being drawn through the crack by capillary action. If the
sash is weatherstripped on the interior side of the capillary break, the
capillary break will also serve as a pressure equalization chamber,
making it very d iff icu lt for wind to drive water through the crack.
The weatherstripping is the air barr ier that maintains pressure in
the PEC.
Automobile makers utilize rainscreen detailing routinely around
the edges of doors, t runk lids, and hatches (12.16). Gaskets are used
as air barriers and are placed well inside the large gap between the
door and the body of the car, behind a PEC.
With horizontal wood siding or shingles, horizontal overlapping
is sufficient to make the wall watertight except under unusually severe
conditions of wind-driven water. The siding or shingles should be

12.15

12.16

121

backed up by a barr ier to the passage of air such as a sheet of asphalt-
impregnated felt or bonded plastic fibers. For best performance, the
siding or shingles should be spaced out, away from the air ba r r ie r,
with strips of wood (12.17). When conf igured in this way, the siding
becomes a ra inscreen and the space is a PEC.
There have been many water leakage problems in the wetter clim-
ates of North America with a s id ing system called exterior insulation
and finish system (EIFS). EIFS consists of a layer of rigid plastic
foam insu la t ing boards covered with a very th in coat of synthetic
stucco that is re in fo rced with a glass fiber mesh. In the bu i ld ings
that have experienced the worst problems, the insulating boards
are adhered directly to the air barr ier layer that is attached to the
wall (12.18). Leakage can occur either because of damage to the th in
stucco layer or because of poor workmansh ip in mak ing sealant
jo in ts where the stucco jo ins window and door frames. This leakage
would be of relatively little consequence if there were a drained
airspace beh ind the insulating boards, because then the system
would func t ion essentially as a rainscreen wall (12.19). However,
when the insu la t ing boards are attached directly to the wall of the

12.17

12.18

12.19

122

bu i ld ing, there is no place for moisture to go once it has leaked
in. It remains in the wall, causing rot, rust, mildew, and mold.
Thousands of houses have had to have entire walls removed and
replaced, and repair costs total tens of millions of dollars.
Splashing mud from the dr ip line of a roof poses only a problem
of unsightliness in the case of concrete or masonry walls, but soil
microorganisms can cause severe decay problems in wood siding.
A wise precaution is never to allow wood to be closer than six
inches (150 mm) to the ground. A clearance of eight inches to a foot
(200 to 300 mm) is even better. Moisture from the soil may rise
up through foundation walls of masonry or concrete by capillary
action, to cause dampness and decay in ground floor rooms. A
flashing through the wall just above the ground line cures this
problem.

Floors and Basements

The strategy of keeping water out of a bu i ld ing by keeping it
away from the bu i ld ing surfaces is nowhere better applied than
to the portions of a bu i ld ing that reach into the ground. A bu i ld ing
that is constantly exposed to standing or runn ing water must rely
on expensive and inherently unre l iab le methods of preventing the
water from penetrating, whereas a bu i ld ing on a well-drained site
needs only a m in imum of precautions in order to stay dry. An ade-
quate roof drainage system is required to carry runoff a safe distance
from the bu i ld ing before discharging it. The surface of the ground
should be sloped away from the bu i ld ing so that surface runo ff is
directed away from and around the bu i ld ing, rather than against it.
Perforated piping should be laid in a gravel-filled trench outside the
founda t ion, ju st below the level of the basement floor. Water that
might otherwise bu i ld up around the founda t ion seeps through the
gravel and the perforations into the pipes (12.20). If subsurface water
conditions are severe, more perforated pipes should be installed
at intervals beneath the basement floor slab. From the system of
perforated pipes, water is conducted away by a nonperforated pipe.
If the site is a large, sloping one, this pipe can slope downhill until
it emerges from the ground, to dra in the water away by means of
gravity. On a small or flat site, the pipes d ra in by gravity into a sump,
a small, cylindrical pit in the floor of the basement. An automatic
electric pump in the sump discharges accumulated water back to
the surface of the ground or to a storm sewer.
If the water table is low and drainage is good, a simple dampproof
coating of asphalt on the exterior of the basement wall is su f f ic ient
to keep moisture out. Under more severe conditions, a continuous
membrane must be installed around the en t ire basement and must

123

12.20

be maintained free of defects while the excavation is being back-
filled. A built-up membrane of asphalt and felt, s im i lar to that used
on a flat roof, or sheets of synthetic rubber cemented carefully at the
seams may be employed, or a continuous layer of clay may be placed
against the walls. When using the felt or rubber membranes, particu-
lar attention must be paid to the junc t ions between floor and walls,
and to jo in ts in the walls, in order to avoid real or potential leaks.
To keep water pressure from bu i ld ing up around a basement, the
gap between the basement walls and the surround ing, undisturbed
soil should be filled with gravel. Better yet, a layer of drainage com-
posite should be placed on the outside of all the walls and should
terminate at the bottom by wrapp ing over the perforated dra in pipes.
Drainage composite is a th in mat of decay-resistant plastic that has a
very open internal structure through which water moves freely. When
water in the soil approaches the basement wall it penetrates the
drainage composite, within which it falls by gravity to the dra in pipe.
The best way to insulate a concrete or masonry basement wall is
to place panels of closed-cell polystyrene foam, which does not
absorb water, on the outside of the wall between the drainage com-
posite and the dampproofing or waterproofing layer. The portion of
this foam plastic insulation that is visible above the surface of the
ground can be finished with either a proprietary coating furn ished
by the foam manu fac tu rer or with wire mesh and stucco.
If a basement must be insulated on the inside, it should have suit-
able provisions to keep the walls dry, as outlined above. Polystyrene
foam insulating panels should be adhered directly to the inside wall
surfaces, with wood strips over them to create a ventilated airspace.
The finish wall ma te r ia ls—usua l ly gypsum board or wood pane ls—
are nailed or screwed to the wood strips with gaps at floor and ceil-
ing to provide ventilation (12.21).
If no basement is constructed, either a crawl space or a concrete
slab-on-grade is bu i lt instead. The soil level in a crawl space should
be high enough that it will not accumu la te water that may seep in
from outside, and a sheet plastic membrane should be installed over
the soil in the crawl space to keep ground moisture from being
released into the a i r. The perimeter walls of the crawl space should
be insulated, and the crawl space should be heated in the winter and
air conditioned in the summer to control its hum id i ty (12.22). Most
bu i ld ing codes still contain a provision that a crawl space should be
na tura l ly ventilated with screened openings around its perimeter.
This is a mistaken approach, because hum id summer air carries
moisture into the crawl space, where it condenses on the ground-
cooled surfaces and leads to the decay of floor fram ing. Similarly,
a basement should be kept tightly closed and air conditioned in
the summer, or at least provided with a dehum id i f ie r. If naturally

124

12.22

12.21

ventilated, a basement will become extremely wet in hum id sum-
mer weather.
In the case of a concrete slab-on-grade, a thick drainage layer of
crushed rock beneath the slab will prevent water from building
up, and a continuous membrane between the crushed rock and
the slab will block the upward migration of water vapor from the
soil. Moisture is likely to condense on top of the cool slab in hum id

125

weather unless the bu i ld ing is closed and e i ther air-conditioned or
dehum id i f ied.

Frost Heaving

When moist soil freezes, it expands slightly. Although this expansion
is not severe, it is sometimes enough to crack pavings, slabs, or foun-
dations. Much more serious damage is possible when soil moisture
migrates toward the surface because of a d i f fe rence in vapor pressure
between the air in the pores of the soil and the free air above the sur-
face of the ground. In cold weather, the deeper one digs, the h igher
the soil tempera ture will be. Thus moisture vapor moving upward
du r ing sub f reez ing weather encounters cooler and cooler soil un t il
a level is reached at wh ich the soil tempera ture is equal to the freez-
ing point of water. Here long ice crystals fo rm and grow vertically,
push ing against the soil with enormous force as they do so. Upwa rd
soil movement of several inches (50 mm or more) is quite common
under these c ircums tances, and pavements and founda t ions can be
severely damaged. This phenomenon is known as frost heaving. In a
founda t ion, it is usua l ly prevented simply by placing the bottom of
the founda t ion below the level to wh ich the soil freezes in w in ter.
With pavements, a generous layer of un iform-s ized stones beneath
the slab generally su f f ices to carry away moisture and allow for any
freez ing expansion. In subarctic climates this is not always suff ic ien t.
Pavements laid on plastic foam thermal insu la t ion, which ma in ta ins
the underlying soil temperature above freezing, are usually satisfactory.
Flat outdoor areas of any k ind— ro adw ay s, tennis courts, dead-
level roofs, athletic fields, sidewalks, p a t io s— c an never be made per-
fectly flat and p lanar. Because of the l im i ta t ions inhe rent in tools,
measu r ing devices, and materials, low spots and high spots always
occur in the surface, even under the most carefully controlled
conditions. This results in the accumulation of puddles du r ing pre-
cipitation, leading to the p rema tu re deterioration of the material
under the pudd led areas. For this reason we seldom attempt to bu i ld
a perfectly flat surface outdoors but instead introduce enough of a
slope into the surface to drain the lower spots. A slope of about one
in fifty, or one-fourth of an inch of drop per foot of horizontal run, is
generally su f f ic ient to leave a reasonably well made surface free of
s tand ing water. Low-slope roofs are usua l ly pitched toward the ir roof
dra ins at this slope. If a dead-level roof is attempted, however, more
durab le and expensive roof ing materials must be used to withstand
the deleterious effects of the s tand ing water that must be expected.
Symmetrical surfaces such as roadways and athletic fields are not
usua l ly sloped in a single direction but are gently crowned in the
center and fa ll off equa l ly toward both sides (12.23).

126

12.23

Interior Sources of Water
Interior Sources of Water

Unwanted water can originate inside a bu i ld ing from leaking
Unwanted water can originate inside a bu i ld ing from leaking
p lumb ing or heating systems, splashover from sinks and baths,
p lumb ing or heating systems, splashover from sinks and baths,
and condensation on cold surfaces. Leaky pipes can be prevented
and condensation on cold surfaces. Leaky pipes can be prevented
only by careful installation. Plumbing installations that tend to
only by careful installation. Plumbing installations that tend to
develop leaks, such as interior roof drains and built-in shower
develop leaks, such as interior roof drains and built-in shower
receptors, are provided with underlying metal or plastic sheet
receptors, are provided with underlying metal or plastic sheet
membranes to gather stray water and funnel it into the d ra in pipes.
membranes to gather stray water and funnel it into the d ra in pipes.
Where splashover is expected, impervious surfaces and, if necessary,
Where splashover is expected, impervious surfaces and, if necessary,
floor drains should be installed to keep water out of the fabric of the
floor drains should be installed to keep water out of the fabric of the
building. Condensate dr ipp ing off water tanks and cold-water pip-
building. Condensate dr ipp ing off water tanks and cold-water pip-
ing is a frequent cause of bu i ld ing damage in hum id climates. Piping
ing is a frequent cause of bu i ld ing damage in hum id climates. Piping
and tanks should be insulated and provided with a vapor retarder.
and tanks should be insulated and provided with a vapor retarder.
Condensate runn ing down the interior of window panes results
Condensate runn ing down the interior of window panes results
in a decaying or rusting sash. Double glass has an interior surface
in a decaying or rusting sash. Double glass has an interior surface
temperature sufficiently high to avoid condensation under most
temperature sufficiently high to avoid condensation under most
circumstances. The metal frames of windows and doors some-
circumstances. The metal frames of windows and doors some-
times accumulate condensate in cold weather. If such frames have
times accumulate condensate in cold weather. If such frames have
hollow internal spaces, condensate may form inside and cause
hollow internal spaces, condensate may form inside and cause
damage unless it is drained continually to the outdoors through drain
damage unless it is drained continually to the outdoors through drain
holes or unless the hollows are completely filled with sealant or
holes or unless the hollows are completely filled with sealant or
mortar to prevent moist air from occupying the space. Condensa-
mortar to prevent moist air from occupying the space. Condensa-
tion on the exposed indoor surfaces of metal frames can usually be
tion on the exposed indoor surfaces of metal frames can usually be
avoided by providing a thermal break in the frame section, to enable
avoided by providing a thermal break in the frame section, to enable
the indoor surface to be maintained at a temperature above the dew
the indoor surface to be maintained at a temperature above the dew
point (12.24).
point (12.24).

Further Reading

Edward Allen. Architectural Detailing: Function, Constructibility, Aesthetics. New
York, Wiley, 1993, pp. 5-36.

J. M. Anderson and J. R. Gill. Rainscreen Cladding. London, Butterworths, 1988.

127
127

12.24

13

Seeingf and lUumination

We gather most of our informa t ion about the world through our
eyes. Eyes are organs capable of sensing a portion of the spectrum of
electromagnetic radiation that we call light. We perceive the longest
visible wavelengths as red in color and progressively shorter wave-
lengths as orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet (13.1). "Colorless"
light, which we perceive as white, is in reality a balanced mixture of
all the wavelengths, whereas black is an absence of light.

Light and Seeing

Useful light originates from either the sun or ar t if ic ial sources.
Because our eyes evolved for the purpose of seeing in sunlight, they
perceive sunlight as being normal in color. Most artificial sources
generate light that is perceptibly d i f fe rent in color from sunlight.
Incandescent sources, such as an open fire, a candle, an oil lamp, or
a glowing filament in a lightbulb, emit light that is def ic ient in the
shorter wavelengths and thus more reddish than sunlight. Fluorescent
light is created in a sealed glass tube filled with mercury vapor.
An electrical discharge between the ends of the tube excites the
mercury vapor into discharging energy to a coating of phosphor on
the inner surface of the tube, causing the phosphor to glow. The color
of light emitted by a fluorescent tube depends on the chemical com-
position of the phosphor. Most commonly, the light is somewhat
def ic ient in the longer, "warmer" wavelengths and appears bluish,
but fluorescent lamps also are available with phosphors that emit
warmer light.
When light falls on an object, the object absorbs a part of the light
and reflects the rest back into the environment. Our eyes gather a

128

small portion of this reflected light, organize it by means of lenses,
and convert it at our retinas to nerve impulses that our brains
translate into visual images. The color of objects is caused by the
selective manner in which they absorb light (13.2). An object that
absorbs more of the shorter wavelengths than the longer ones
reflects light richer in the longer wavelengths; that is, it has a warm
color. Our eyes perceive objects as shaped areas of various colors.
At very low levels of object brightness, the eye can see only
large, simple shapes and cannot distinguish colors from one another
(13.3). In slightly brighter light, it can see somewhat smaller shapes,
but it still cannot distinguish colors. With a bit more light, colors
begin to be discernible but are still very muted and grayish. We can
read large black pr int on white paper, but not easily. As the intensity
of object brightness 
is further increased through progressively
brighter illumination, we can read finer print, faster and with greater
accuracy. Colors appear progressively brighter, and we can distin-
guish increasingly finer gradations of hue. As intensities become
very high, however, visual eff ic iency increases only marginally. Our
eyes begin to be more and more dazzled by intensely bright objects.
We begin to feel pain and squint in an attempt to cut down on the
amount of light entering our eyes. We can look at brilliant light for
only short periods of time before our eyes close from visual fatigue.
If we are forced to view objects of pa inful brightness, our retinas may
be damaged.
Our eyes adjust automatically to changes in light intensity. Eyelids,
eyelashes, and eyebrows constitute an external system of adjustment.
Internally, the pupils change size quite rapidly in response to varying

129

13.1

13.2

13.3

lighting conditions, regulating the amount of light gathered by the
eyes. The m a jor internal ad ju s tment mechan ism is much slower,
however, and occurs in the retina. Eyes adapt qu ick ly to small
changes in brightness by chang ing the pup i ls but need an adapta-
tion time measured in m inu tes for large changes. In Na ture, where
changes of i l lum ina t ion are gradua l, this causes few problems.
When walking from br ight sunlight into a dark theater or basement,
however, we experience a condition of "night blindness" for a
period of some minutes.
Our eyes can ad ju st to only a single level of brightness. That is, if
a very b r ight ob ject and a dark ob ject are placed side by side, the
bright ob ject will be seen as being very harsh ly lit and may be too
bright to look at for very long. The dark ob ject will be d i f f icu lt to
discern and will at best be seen as a silhouette (13 .4 ,13-5)- Yet when
the same dark ob ject is placed against a still darker background in
the absence of the very br ight object, it appears quite br ight and is
legible in considerable detail, because the eye has ad jus ted to its
level of brightness. When we look at a person or an object next to a
bright ob ject such as the sun, a lightbulb, or a portion of the daytime
sky, our eyes ad ju st to the glare of the br ight ob ject insofar as they are
able, and we see the rema inder of the visual field as a gray b lur. We
see best when the object we wish to see, termed the visual task by
lighting designers, is the brightest thing in our field of vision and
everything else is less bright, although still w i th in the same general
range of brightness.

130

13.4

13.5

Daylighting

Un t il quite recently in history, people went to bed when the sun
went down. Fires, candles, and oil lamps were very weak sources
of i l lum ina t ion and too expensive for most people to afford. Under
these conditions, na tural light in bu i ld ings was a necessity and came
to be rather well understood in an intuitive way. Bu i ld ing orienta-
tions and configurations, the conf igura t ion of window openings,
and interior finishes came to be selected in such a way as to ensure
suff ic ient levels of daylighting in interior spaces. Buildings were also
developed with architectonic devices such as overhangs, pediments,
string courses, quoins, niches, and various moldings to create pleas-
ing, sh i f t ing patterns of shade and shadow on the ir facades as the sun
moved across the sky, an art that lies largely forgotten at the present
time (13.6).
We are forced to adopt an ambivalent attitude toward the sun
in the daylighting of buildings. The sun is, of course, the source of
daylight, and a shaft of sunlight entering a window, particularly in
winter, exerts a very chee r ful inf luence, brightening interior colors
and bringing both psychological and physical warmth. Yet we can-
not look directly at the sun itself, and the finer visual tasks such as
reading and sewing are almost impossible to carry out in the intense
glare of direct sunlight. Even the sky, brilliant with scattered light
from the sun, is often bright enough to dazzle the eye. In warm
weather, fur thermore, we cannot tolerate the heat of direct sunlight
in buildings. The bleaching effect of sunlight on carpets, fabrics,
and wood can be a problem at any time of year. And finally, we must
face the fact that the sun is often obscured partially or entirely by

!3!

Rome, Santa Susanna 1597-1603
Carlo Mademo, Architect

13.6

13.6

clouds. For these reasons, we rely largely on d iffused sunlight or on
reflected, indirect sunlight to illuminate the interiors of buildings.
The reflecting surface absorbs much of the heat and scatters the
visible light at a much lower intensity than that of direct sunlight.
A large vocabulary of shading and reflecting devices has developed
over the m i l lenn ia. Trees, vines, overhangs, awnings, shutters of
every description, louvers, blinds, shades, and curtains are among
the more common shading devices (13.7-13.9). Overhead shading
devices block or filter direct sunlight, allowing only reflected light
from sky and ground to enter the windows. Louvers and blinds can
act as shades or can convert direct sunlight to a softer, reflected light.
Whitened exterior surfaces and w indow frames reflect light through
windows. Windows and skylights that face north in the northern
temperate latitudes receive little or no direct sunlight and so are use-
ful in gathering indirect light from the bright sky w i thout s ign if icant
heat gain.
When the sun does not penetrate a room directly, the amount of
na tural light available at a given point in the room is determined by
several factors. The most important is the proportion of the total area
of the sky that can be "seen" directly by that point through windows
and skylights, and the relative brightness of those parts of the sky that
are "seen." The sky at the hor izon is only about one-third as br ight

13.7

13.8

13.9

132

13.11

13.12

13.14

13.10

as the sky directly overhead. For this reason, the nearer a window is
to the ceiling, the more light it will gather, assuming, of course, that
no trees or other buildings obstruct it. Skylights, which gather light
from the bright overhead sky, are particularly effective sources of natu-
ral illumination (13.10). In some situations, significant quantities
of light are also reflected into windows by the ground or nearby
building surfaces and reach a particular indoor point either directly
or after being reflected again by the interior surfaces of the room.
The proportions and surface finishes of the room play an import-
ant role in daylighting. In general, tallness, shallowness, and high
surface reflectances help make rooms brighter (13.11). Low rooms,
deep rooms with windows at the narrow end, and rooms with dark-
colored surfaces are more d i f f icu lt to illuminate with daylight (13.12).
The farther one moves away from the windows toward the back of
the room, the smaller the segment of sky that will be "seen" directly,
and the larger the number of successive reflections that will be
needed to carry light to the visual task. Highly reflective su r faces—
white and light colors, metallic surfaces—absorb less light at each
reflection, allowing more to reach the interior of the room. Higher
ceilings reduce the number of reflections required to carry light a
given distance toward the interior. Windows on a second side of the
room, roof monitors, skylights, or clerestories help balance daylight-
ing levels throughout a room (13.13). A light shelf is a particularly
powerful reflecting device that throws light deep into a room (13.14).
If windows or skylights fall within the normal field of vision of
people in a room, they are likely to be distractingly bright compared
with other things the occupants want to see. A window next to a

!33

blackboard in a school, for example, is likely to be many times
brighter than the blackboard; its glare renders the blackboard
useless. In general, windows should be placed away from interior
focal points of rooms. If windows or skylights face large areas of
sky, louvers or cur ta ins may have to be installed to reduce their
apparent brightness. Light-colored window frames, especially if they
are splayed, help reduce uncomfortable contrasts between br ight
outdoor views and a darker in ter ior (13.15).
Lighting by daylight is an appealing concept for a number of
reasons. It provides a pleasant psychological linkage between indoors
and outdoors. It is "natural" in color. It varies in interesting ways
with the weather and the time of day and year. It usua l ly costs little
more money to install windows and surfaces that are appropriate to
a good daylighting scheme than to install them at random, and the
cost of daylighting energy is forever free. Some ma in tenance costs
are incurred in keeping glass and interior bu i ld ing surfaces clean, but
little if any more than the normal costs of bu i ld ing ma in tenance.

Artificial Lighting

The chief drawback of daylighting is its inconstancy, especially its
total unavailability between sundown and sunup. Artificial electric
light is instantly and constantly available, is easily man ipu la ted by a
designer, and can be controlled by the occupants of the building.
This suggests strongly that daylighting and ar t if ic ial lighting make
good partners, with ar t if ic ial lighting be ing used ma in ly for night-
time i l lum ina t ion and as a daytime supplement when daylighting
alone is in su f f ic ien t.
The total flow of light produced by three common artificial sources
of light (collectively called lamps) is approximately as follows:

Wax candle 
13 lumens
loo-watt incandescent lamp 
1,500 lumens
Sy-watt high-efficiency fluorescent lamp 6,600 lumens

The loo-watt lamp produces about one hundred times as much
light as a candle does, at an hour ly energy cost that is about a penny
at cu r rent electrical rates. Its eff ic iency is 15 lumens per watt. The
fluorescent lamp is about five times as e f f ic ient at 75 lumens per
watt. This means that it can produce the same level of i l lum ina t ion
as an incandescent lamp at a much lower energy cost. It also
indicates that the fluorescent lamp introduces much less waste heat
into the room per lumen output than does an incandescent lamp,
a fea tu re that is of considerable importance in a bu i ld ing that
must be kept cool in hot weather.

*34

13.15

But eff ic iency is not the only criterion in choosing a light source.
Incandescent lamps cast a warm-colored light somewhat similar to
firelight or candlelight. A person's skin looks warm and rosy under
incandescent illumination; food looks appetizing; and a room takes
on a pleasant glow, especially if its walls are made of warm-colored
materials such as na tural wood or reddish brick. The reflection of
the glowing filament sparkles invitingly in glassware, china, silver, or
the f in ish of an automobile. By contrast, people and food look a bit
sickly under the bluish light of cool-white fluorescent illumina-
tion, and the low-brightness fluorescent source does not create
such intense sparkles. Incandescent fixtures also are simple and
inexpensive to install and maintain. Thus incandescent lighting
still predominates in homes, restaurants, churches, and many retail
establishments where warm color and sparkle enhance the appear-
ance of the merchandise. But fluorescent lighting is clearly superior
economically in large commercial, industrial, and institutional
applications. With the introduction of fluorescent lamps in a w ider
range of color spectra and shapes, the choice between the two
systems is no longer so clear.
In the same range of efficiency as the best fluorescent tubes
are high-intensity-discharge (HID) lamps, inc lud ing metal halide,
high-pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, and mercury vapor
lamps. Despite their high output of light, however, many of these
sources give poor color renditions, limiting their use primarily to
outdoor lighting. But some high-pressure sodium and metal halide
lamps with acceptable color characteristics have been developed
specifically as high-efficiency replacements for incandescent lamps
in interior applications. Unlike incandescent sources, fluorescent
and HID lamps require ballasts, which are electromagnetic or elec-
tronic components in each fixture that regulate voltage, current, and
waveform of the electricity to start and operate the lamps.
Tungsten halogen incandescent lamps are smaller and operate
at higher temperatures than standard incandescents. They also are
more e f f ic ient (though not as much so as fluorescents and HIDs).
They provide good color rendition and sparkle, which makes them
particularly attractive for homes, restaurants, and retail stores.
Where to place artificial light sources in a building is a question
of great importance. Sometimes a poorly placed fixture displays a
person or an object "in a bad light," as when a light coming from
directly above or below casts underworldly shadows across even the
most pleasant of faces. Sometimes a badly located lamp can place
an ob ject in shadow, as is the case when a right-handed person tries
to write in light coming from a lamp at the right-hand side of the
desk. Sometimes a source of light intrudes into the field of vision
and causes distracting or damaging glare. Shielding or d i f fus ing

!35

13.16

13.17

devices within the light source can do a great deal to counter this
glare, but usua l ly it is preferable to locate the source outside the
normal fields of vision of persons using a given area.

Lighting Design

An important objective of lighting design is to achieve an appro-
priate brightness (more properly called luminance) of the visual task.
The appropriate lum inance may be very dim if the visual task is a
plate of food on a dining table, very bright if it is someone's appendix
on an operating table, or between the two for most other visual tasks
(13.16, 13.17). In order to achieve the desired lum inance, an appro-
priate density of light flow to the surface must be provided. This is
achieved by selecting and arrang ing light sources whose pattern and
quantity of lum inous ou tput work in con junc t ion with room sur-
faces of appropriate reflectances. As with daylighting, light-colored,
highly reflective room surfaces help provide more i l lum ina t ion
from the same amount of energy.
Surface colors play an important role, too, in preventing glare:
A white piece of paper on a black desktop causes visual fatigue
because of the great contrast in brightness between the two, whereas
a white paper on a light gray top may be viewed with comfort for
long periods of time. The other essential consideration in prevent-
ing glare is to avoid sharp contrasts between the levels of light flow
to the task and to the surround ing environment. It is often a good
idea to have a small lamp that casts a bright light on an exacting
visual task, but unless the rest of the room is i l lum ina ted to an inter-
mediate level of brightness, visual fatigue is likely to result.
The correlation between increasing quantities of i l lum ina t ion
and increased visual efficiency, which was established in laboratory
tests, has led some designers to install systems of extreme brightness
and prodigious electrical consumption in offices and factories. Field
testing, however, has shown that once an acceptable m in imum level
of lighting has been established in a room, human satisfaction and
performance are more likely to be based on qualitative factors than
on the sheer quan t i ty of i l lum ina t ion provided.
When we design a lighting system for a bu i ld ing, we must begin
by asking the purpose of the system: Is it to create a certain mood, to
enhance the appearance of the bu i ld ing from inside or out, to flatter
human faces, to call attention to an object or a person, to make read-
ing or work easier, or some combination of these? How will people
enter the building, move through it, and leave it, by night and by
day, and how can the lighting design help the ir eyes and the ir emo-
tions ad ju st to these transitions? When a person spends time in an
interior space of the building, how can light best contribute to the

i36

person's comfort and pleasure? Once these questions have been
answered, the design options can be analyzed: What role can day-
lighting play, and where will artificial light be preferable? What
color spectra of artificial light will be most effective? How should
the illumination of the building and its tasks change between day
and night? Should the light in a particular area of the bu i ld ing
be spread evenly throughout the area or largely concentrated on
specific places? What types of windows and fixtures will create
the appropriate patterns of illumination, and where should they be
placed? These decisions are critical, for it is through illumination
that the eye perceives a bu i ld ing from inside and outside, and it is
through the luminous environment of buildings that the human eye
is able to function and to en joy the un ique aesthetic experiences
of sight.

Further Reading

M. David Egan. Concepts in Architectural Lighting. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1983.

137

14

Hearing? and Beingf
Heard

We take pleasure in the sound of a favorite piece of music, the sound
of a fr iend 's voice, the songs of b irds on a summer mo rn ing, and the
spoken words of the actors in a play or on a screen. We derive great
satisfaction f rom c rea t ing music with voice or ins trumen ts, speaking
to a f r iend, or conveying an impor tant message to an interested aud i-
ence. Under such circumstances, we want to hear and to be hea rd.
But und er other circumstances, we also want the equally impor tant
options not to hear and not to be heard, the options of peace and pri-
vacy. We wish not to have to listen to con t inual loud traff ic noise or
to music that appeals to a neighbor's taste but not to ours, especially
if these noises in terfere with our sleep, our ability to concentrate, or
our ability to hear and to be heard in our immediate surroundings.
We wish not to have our secrets known to any but their intended
hearers, and we may even wish to make unp leasant sound s— l ike
lea rn ing to p lay the v io l in or cu t t ing lumber on a power saw—
w i thout embarrass ing ourselves or d is tu rb ing others.
We are sometimes f rus t ra ted in our attempts to hear and be heard
by the weakness of the sound or by its being obscured and confused
by unwan ted noise or its own echoes. Often our acoustical privacy
is violated by noisy su r round ings or by surround ings in wh ich we
know that every whisper is audible to a neighbor. Any building,
whe ther or not it was designed with hea r ing conditions in m ind,
has nume rous important effects on the propagation of sound. If
thorough ly unders tood, these effects can be exploited and man ip-
u la ted by a designer to create indoor acoustical cond i t ions that are
appropr ia te to the va r ious hum an func t ions housed by a bu i ld ing.

i?8

Sound

Sound is a sensation induced through the ear by waves of varying
air pressure emanating from a vibrating source. Within the ear, the
sound waves strike the eardrum (tympanic membrane), setting up
vibrations that are transmitted mechan ica l ly by tiny levers of bone to
an extraordinarily sensitive inner ear mechanism (cochlea), where
they are converted to nerve impulses for interpretation by the bra in
(14.1). The ears of a young listener are capable of detecting fre-
quencies of vibration ranging between about 20 and 20,000 cycles
per second (Hz ), but with advancing age, we lose our ability to hear
the higher frequencies; thus 10,000 to 12,000 cycles per second are
typical upper limits of hearing for middle-aged ears.
With respect to the pressure of the sound waves, the average ear
can withstand the loudest sounds of Na ture and also detect sounds
at pressures many millions of times smaller. In order to compress
this broad range of sound pressure levels into manageable scale of
measuremen t, a logarithmic scale of decibels (db) is used. (A decibel
is one-tenth of a bel. The un it is named in honor of Alexander
Graham Bell who, in addition to inven t ing the telephone, did very
s ign if icant research on hea r ing and sound .) The accompanying
diagram gives a clearer idea of how the human ear is affected by
sounds of d i f fe rent pressures (14.2).
The sounds of hum an speech are produced by vibrations of the
vocal cords that are modified by the actions of the throat, nose, and
mouth. The various sounds range in duration from about one-
fiftieth to one-third second. The fundamen tal f requenc ies of the
voice lie mostly between 100 and 600 cycles per second, but many of
the sounds, consonants in particular, are of much higher frequency
and must be heard clearly for max imum intelligibility. Between the
most timid whisper and the loudest shout, there is a wide range of
sound pressure levels, but the average speaker covers a range of
no more than about 30 db. As one would expect, louder speech is
generally more intelligible than softer speech.
Musical sounds are usually of longer duration than the sounds
of speech and cover much broader ranges of both f requency and
sound pressure, especially in the case of instrumental music. Some
large pipe organs are capable of producing pitches whose frequencies
lie close to the extreme lower end of the hea r ing spectrum. Very
high f requenc ies occur routinely in the high-pitched overtones of
all musical instruments. The softest passages of symphonic music
are barely audible, and the loudest rock music exceeds the threshold
of pa in.
Noise is unwan ted sound. It may be speech or music, sounds
of na tural forces such as wind and rain, or mechanical sounds of

139

14.1

^ Decibels
lo"2* 

|4O Jet aircraft at dose range

io"3 

ISO Threshold of pain

ICf4 120 Elevated train close by

io"5 

I0"fe 

IIO Symphony orchestra, ff

loo Fbwer saw

IO"7 90 Downtown street
lo~8 30 Shouting at close range
io"9 70 
Inside automobile, 55 mph
lo"'° eo Pace-to-face conversation
IO"11 5O Average office

JO""'2- 4O Quiet living room
lo~'* 3O Quiet bedroom

lo"'4 20 Rural ambient noise
IO""15 
io Rustling leaves
io""16 
0 Threshold of hearing 14.2

14.2

engines, gears, fans, tires on pavement, squealing brakes, buzz ing
electrical equipment, or banging pipes. The potential sources of
noise in contemporary society are so diverse in their sound charac-
teristics that it is impossible to offer any generalizations about their
properties; each noise problem must be analyzed ind iv idua l ly to
determine its source, its characteristic range of frequenc ies, and its
sound pressure before steps can be taken to rec t ify it.
In theory, sound waves radiate spherically from a point source
(14.3). If the source were suspended in an ideal volume of air, the
sound pressure would d im in ish in proportion to the square of the
distance of the listener from the source. In practice, sound waves
often originate from sources such as the hum an voice that radiate
more strongly in some directions than in others. Sound waves are
invariably acted on in various ways by ground or bu i ld ing surfaces,
resulting in the formation of sound fields that cannot be described
by means of simple mathematical expressions (14.4,14.5)-
Wavelengths for audible frequencies vary from more than 50 feet
(15 m) for very low pitches to less than an inch (a few millimeters)
for the very high ones. When sound waves strike an object that is
smaller than or similar in dimension to the wavelength of the sound,
d i f f rac t ion occurs, scattering the waves in many directions. When
a sound wave strikes a surface that is large compared with its wave-
length, a portion of the sound energy is reflected, much as light is
reflected from a m irror, and a portion is absorbed by the surface.
The harder and more rigid a surface is, the larger the proportion it
will reflect. Soft, porous materials absorb a large proportion of the
incident sound energy, dissipating it in immeasurably small flows
of heat created by friction between the moving molecules of air and
the walls of the pores of the materials. For a given frequency, optimum
absorption is achieved by pores placed at a distance of one-quarter
wavelength from a rigid, hard surface, where the velocity of the air
molecules in both incoming and reflected sound waves is at a
max imum. This means that greater thicknesses of porous materials
are required to absorb lower frequenc ies. A th in fab r ic wall covering
absorbs only those frequencies near or above the top of the audible
range. A padded carpet or thick drapery absorbs the ma jor i ty of incid-
ent sound in the higher portion of the audible range. Deep, porous
upholstery absorbs most sound from middle frequencies upward.
The lowest musical frequenc ies cannot be absorbed eff ic ien t ly by
ord inary thicknesses of porous material. A window opened into free
air absorbs all sound striking it and is the limiting case of total absorp-
tion. A smooth, dense, painted wall of concrete or plaster absorbs
less than 5 percent of inc ident sound; it is an excellent reflector.
Sound is capable of inducing resonant responses in hollow vessels
or constructions whose natural frequenc ies match that of the sound.

140

14.3

14.4

14.5

The air within the vessel acts as a spring, oscillating at a frequency
that is characteristic of the volume and length of the vessel. Because
a resonating body absorbs energy from the waves that excite it,
resonating devices offer a useful means of absorbing sound energy.
In practice, resonators are easiest to construct for the lower fre-
quencies, which makes them a useful ad jun ct to porous absorbers
for the treatment of rooms in which the fu ll range of frequencies
needs to be controlled. In new concert halls, resonators are usually
constructed as concealed hollows in walls.
Sound is able to travel in media other than a i r— it can be trans-
mitted through steel, wood, concrete, masonry, or almost any rigid
material of construction (14.6). The sound of footsteps (especially
of high heels) is readily transmitted through a concrete floor slab
into the air of the room below. A metal pipe can carry plumbing noise
throughout a building. A beam can carry sound vibrations to an
adjacent room or the rumble of an electric motor through a building.
Every bu i ld ing produces sounds of its own, such as the patter of
rain and sleet on building surfaces; the whistle of infiltrating wind;
the slamming of doors; the creaking of old wood floors underfoot; the
mechanical noises of heating systems, plumbing systems, elevator
machinery, garbage grinders, and various other machines; and the
occasional creaks, cracking noises, and groans of a structure being
pushed and pulled by wind, heat, and hum id i ty. We can reduce
mechanical noises by selecting quiet devices, installing them as far
as possible from the inhabited areas of the building, mounting them
with resilient fittings to eliminate structure-borne noise, and hous-
ing them in sound-isolating enclosures to cut down on the airborne
transmission of their noise. We can usually reduce wind noises with
better weatherstripping on windows and doors, which gives the
added benefits of lower transmission of outdoor noises to the interior
and lower heating and cooling costs. Rain and sleet sounds, if
objectionable, can be reduced by using heavier roof and window
construction. Structural noises produced by the slippage of building
components past one another dur ing sporadic releases of built-up
stresses are largely inevitable and d i f f icu lt to remedy. Sometimes,
if the source of the rubb ing can be located precisely, a bu i ld ing
component can be nailed or bolted tighter, or graphite particles can
be blown into the moving jo int as a lubr ican t.
A building conducts sound from room to room in various ways.
Sound passes between rooms wherever an opening exists, even a
very small one such as a keyhole, the slot at the bottom of a door,
or the crack between a partition and the ceiling (14.7). Open or
ill-fitting windows and doors transmit sound readily. Ductwork for
heating, cooling, or ventilating systems often provides an air path
from room to room that, unless lined with sound-absorbing material,

141

14.6

14.7

14.8

readily transmits conversations and other sounds (14.8). If we want
privacy, we should weatherstrip cracks around windows and doors
and close all other cracks and openings with a ir t ight sealants.
Partitions must go from the top of one floor slab to the unders ide
of the next for max imum sound isolation and should be bu i lt in as
massive and airtight a manner as possible. A thick brick partition
wall makes a good sound barr ier between rooms. A par t i t ion of con-
crete blocks is not as good as one of bricks, because the blocks are
somewhat porous, and the pores allow some sound to pass through.
Plastering one or both surfaces of a block partition to make it airtight
resolves this problem.
Most partitions are bu i lt of slender, upr ight f ram ing members
to which plaster or gypsum board surfaces are attached on both
sides. An ordinary partition of this type is not a very effective ba r r ier
to sound. To improve its acoustical performance, layers of gypsum
board may be added to one or both sides to increase its mass. If one
of these layers is attached with resilient metal clips instead of being
screwed tightly to the f ram ing, the structure-borne transmission
of sound through the partition will be reduced substantially. Still
better acoustic isolation can be achieved by inserting fibrous batts
to deaden the transmission of sound across the airspaces inside the
partition.
"Acoustic" tiles, wh ich are excellent absorbers of inc ident sound
w i th in a room, help to lower noise levels by absorbing some of the
sound energy generated in a room, but because of the ir extreme
porosity and low density, they are of no value in reducing the pas-
sage of noise from room to room through a ceiling or wall. The same
is t rue of cu r ta ins and carpets, except for the impact-cushioning
action of carpets in preventing the generation of noise. An excellent
way of reduc ing the transmission of impact noise through floors is to
add a thick carpet and pad to the floor. For more quiet, a resilient
layer can be added to the floor construction, such as a layer of
compressible plastic ma t t ing between the floor slab and the finish
flooring material or resilient metal clips to wh ich the plaster ce i l ing
is mounted to the unders ide of the slab.

Creating Good Hearing Conditions

The acoustical suitability of a room for a concert, dramatic produc-
tion, lecture, or religious service depends ma in ly on the shape, size,
and proportions of the room and the amoun ts of sound of various
frequencies that are absorbed, reflected, and scattered by its surfaces
and contents.
The shape of the room is extremely impor tant because it deter-
m ines the paths along which sound is reflected. In small rooms with

142

parallel walls, standing waves are sometimes evident, in which cer-
tain frequenc ies of voice or music are exaggerated as they repeatedly
bounce back and forth between opposite walls. Standing waves
can be eliminated by slightly tilting or skewing two adjacent walls of
the room or by add ing acoustically absorptive material to them.
Rooms with concave surfaces tend to focus sound reflections in one
or more areas, leaving acoustic "dead spots" elsewhere. A "whisper-
ing gallery" is a room in which two participants can stand near a
curved surface and hear each other's whispering with startling loud-
ness and clarity (14.9). Or it can be a room with a concave surface
at each end, with the participants standing at the foci of the curved
surfaces. Concave surfaces are generally to be avoided in perform-
ance halls of any kind because they focus sound in some areas and
leave other areas with insuff ic ient sound. Convex surfaces, on the
other hand, scatter reflected sound widely, helping reinforce sound
levels in all parts of a room (14.10). Random, irregular room surfaces
can be designed to scatter and reflect sound in patterns that dis-
tribute sound more or less evenly to all listeners. Thus an acoustical
design for a music performance hall often includes convex and
irregular surfaces (14.11).
Sound reinforcement, the amplification of sound by its being
heard from various reflections as well as directly from the source,
is a very important function of the reflective properties of a room.
The ceilings of meeting rooms, classrooms, and aud i tor iums are
often completely covered with sound-absorbing materials by well-
intentioned but ill-informed people. This eliminates any sound
reinforcement by reflections off the ceiling and results in inade-
quate sound levels toward the rear of the room. The usual next step,
the installation of an electronic sound re inforcement system, often
would be unnecessary if much of the center of the ceiling had been

14.10

H3

14.9

14.11

left uncovered as a reflecting surface. On the other hand, in some
very large halls a reflected sound can take so long a path that it arrives
at the ears of a listener significantly later than the direct sound from
the stage; it is heard as a distinct echo, which confuses the sound
rather than reinforces it. Such long-path reflections must be elim-
inated through improved room geometry or the selective use of
absorptive surfaces. It is important, however, to reinforce sound by
creating reflections along short paths, which cannot create echoes.
The period of time du r ing which a sound bounces around a room
before dying to an inaud ib le level is known as the reverberation time
of the room. In general, reverberation time increases with increas-
ing room volume, because of the longer paths that each sound wave
must travel between its successive reflections, and it decreases when
we add sound-absorbing materials, which intercept and swallow the
waves. Reverberation is important in lecture halls, theaters, houses
of worship, and concert halls because it sustains and blends the
sounds, an effect that makes them much smoother and richer than
the same sounds propagated in the open a ir. The achievement of an
appropriate reverberation time for a given hall is of great import-
ance. For speech, a short reverberation time is best, so that short
consonant sounds remain clear. But a certain amount of reverbera-
tion helps enrich a speaker's voice and gives a speaker a sense of how
well his or her voice is carrying to the audience. For mus ic, longer
reverberation times extend and blend the sounds of the instruments
or voices in a way that composers, musicians, and audiences have
come to expect and demand. Music sounds dead and brittle in a

144

hall with too short a reverberation time but will lose clarity and
definition if the reverberation time is too long. A hall of optimum
design imparts brilliance and color to the music, without destroying
its clear articulation. Houses of worship in which preaching is of
prime importance need relatively short reverberation times, whereas
those with more ceremonial services need longer ones. It is thought
that the practice in the more ceremonial religions of chanting the
liturgy grew out of the need to communicate clearly in cavernous
buildings with very long reverberation times. Liturgical music, from
medieval times to the present, has often depended on large, echoing
interiors for much of its emotional effect.
In order to design a hall with good hearing conditions, then, we
must develop a room shape that distributes and reinforces sound
evenly throughout the audience, and we must determine a room
volume that will give a reverberation time that is appropriate for the
uses to which the hall will be put. The distribution of sound in the
hall is predicted by plotting paths of sound rays and their reflections
on plan and section drawings or by using computer graphics. The
reverberation time is calculated on the basis of the volume of the
hall and the amount of sound that will be absorbed by each of its
surfaces. These predictions may be sharpened and elaborated by
electronically testing a scale model of the hall, or by a computer
simulation.
For good listening conditions in a hall, we also must reduce noise
levels to a m in imum so as to avoid interference with the sounds
of the performance. This is achieved by using heavy, airtight con-
struction in walls, roofs, and floors to keep out external noise and
by installing very quiet systems for ventilating, heating, and cooling
the hall.
Sophisticated electronic devices have enhanced our ability to
design the acoustics of performance halls. When creating a hall out
of an existing building that was designed for other purposes, it is
sometimes impossible to achieve the optimum configuration and
proportions for good hear ing conditions. In this situation, a system
of speakers and amplifiers often can be designed to remedy the
defects in the natural acoustics. Such a system might focus addi-
tional sound into "dead" areas of the hall, or it might add a fraction
of a second to its reverberation time. It is possible to predict in
advance what the acoustical characteristics of any hall will be by
modeling them with electronic equipment through which we can
hear an accurate simulation of what music will sound like at any
designated location in that hall. This allows management, musi-
cians, and designers to "try out" the hall before it is constructed,
to propose changes in its acoustical environment, and to hear the
results of these changes.

H5

Controlling Noise

Noise is unwan ted sound. Where we need qu iet rooms for sleep
or study, noise must be kept to a m in imum. Noise control begins
by p lann ing the bu i ld ing in such a way that the rooms that need
to be qu iet are as distant as possible from sources of noise such
as busy streets, pub l ic rooms, kitchens, workshops, gymnasiums,
or rooms housing operating mach inery. In this way, the interven-
ing rooms shield the qu iet rooms from much of the clamor. The
walls, floor, and ce i l ing of the quiet rooms should be heavy and
airtight.
If the noise is coming across open land from a factory, a irpor t, or
highway, increasing distance helps reduce its intensity. Dense,
wide groves of evergreen trees can absorb some of the noise,
although ind iv idual trees or single lines of trees are of little use.
Ord inary wood fences are too lightweight to block noise. A heavy
wall of concrete or masonry can be more effective, but it must be
high and broad enough to block all direct sight lines between the
qu iet room and the noise, and it must be close to either the room or
the source of noise. The freeway noise barriers that are seen around
many large cities are generally close to the roadway, tall enough to
cut all direct sight lines, and made of closely fitted pieces of con-
crete, masonry, or heavy t imber. Buildings near airports are exposed
to noise that is exceptionally loud and that arrives from planes
at many d i f fe rent locations in the sky and on the ground, wh ich
makes it par t icu lar ly d i f f i cu lt to keep the noise out. Some relief can
be had by replacing all the windows with sealed units made of two
or more layers of laminated glass with air spaces between the layers.
Laminated glass is made by sandwiching a layer of very soft plastic
between two sheets of glass. The soft inner layer helps to damp the
passage of sound vibrations through the glass. When the bu i ld ing is
sealed, of course, it must be a r t i f ic ia l ly ventilated and cooled. The
low-level noise of the air conditioning system helps to mask the
a i rc ra ft noise.
Sometimes when noise is pa r t icu la r ly persistent and annoying, a
bu i ld ing cannot be effectively protected from it, or there may not be
enough money for trea tment to reduce it. And sometimes a room is
so quiet that even a whisper is distracting, and the sounds of one's
respiration, heartbeat, and body movements are bothersome. In
any of these cases, in t roduc ing a low-level masking noise can help
obscure the unwan ted sounds. The best masking noises are the natu-
ral ones that almost everyone enjoys: waves lapping against a shore,
wind blowing through trees, an open fire crackling, rain drumm-
ing on a roof, a brook or foun ta in splashing. None of these restful

146

sounds has the distractive qualities inherent in music or speech. But
if they are not available, a slightly noisy ventilating system may be
as effective. In many commercial buildings, masking noise is
introduced electronically through a system of speakers distributed
throughout. Any masking noise must be strong in the frequencies
that predominate in the sound to be masked.

Quieting a Noisy Room

Why are some restaurants so noisy that we have to shout to converse
with our tablemates, whereas other restaurants are hushed and
relaxed? A noisy restaurant is one with hard surfaces all around: plas-
ter walls and ceiling and a bare floor. The first few diners that arrive
for dinner are able to converse normally. When more people arrive
and begin speaking, sound levels rise with the considerable assis-
tance of sounds that are reflected from the surfaces of the room. As
sound levels rise, everyone must speak more loudly in order to be
understood. This creates a still higher level of noise, people have to
speak louder still, and a vicious circle is established that reaches
climax with everyone shouting amid a level of general noise that
approximates that of an airport runway. If the same restaurant
were to have acoustic panels on its ceiling, heavy curtains on the
windows, deep upholstery on the chairs, and a thick, padded carpet
on the floor, it would become a quiet restaurant. If you're seeking a
quiet place for a meal, look for the carpet and acoustic panels and
avoid restaurants with hard surfaces.

Creating Privacy

If a building must create acoustical pr ivacy—preven t ing conversa-
tions from being ove rhea rd—much the same strategies come into
play: Construction must be airtight and heavy. Sound levels within
the room can be lowered somewhat by the use of sound-absorbing
materials. And masking noise can be invaluable. A barroom packed
elbow to elbow with chattering people is in fact a very private envi-
ronment for intimate conversation. There is simply so much noise
generated in the frequency range of human speech that only the
closest, most attentive listener can understand one's words. This is
why, too, master spies and diplomats, whether fictional or real, turn
up the radio or television before conducting discussions in a room
that is suspected of being "bugged."
Hearing, being heard, not hearing, and not being heard are
important factors that we must consider in the design of buildings.

H7

In most circumstances the ord inary materials with which we bu i ld
are suff ic ient for the purpose. But they must be correctly and care-
fu l ly used.

Further Reading

Madan Mehta, Jim Johnson, and Jorge Rocafort. Architectural Acoustics. Upper
Saddle River, N.J., Prentice-Hall, 1999.

148

15

Providing? Concentrated
Energy

Until the late nineteenth century, only two forms of energy were
commonly available in ordinary buildings for perform ing useful
work: fire and human muscle power. Today, in most parts of the
world, electricity is available in every room of every bu i ld ing as a
clean, reliable, exceptionally convenient form of energy for illum-
inating, heating, operating tools and appliances, and powering
electronic communications and entertainment.

Generating and Transmitting Electricity

Electricity is generated in large plants that are powered by either
water turbines fed from reservoirs or, more commonly, steam tur-
bines (15.1). The steam is generated by coal, oil, gas, or nuclear fue l.
The best steam plants are about 40 percent efficient, which means
that one-and-a-half times as much heat is lost up the chimneys of
the power plant and into the waterways used to cool the condensers
as is put into the transmission lines as potentially useful energy.
Fur ther losses are incurred in transmitting the electricity to the user,
resulting in an overall efficiency for an electrical generation and dis-
tribution system of about one-third. Fortunately, electrical devices
in buildings convert the electricity to useful energy at rather high
efficiencies, but this does not change the fact that heat-producing
appliances that can bu rn fuels in a building, generally at efficiencies
of 80 to 95 percent, are inherently less consumptive of fuel and
cheaper to operate than are their electrical counterparts, except in
some areas with abundant hydroelectric energy.
The generation of electricity on individual building sites is
becoming more common, though it is still relatively rare. Large com-
plexes of buildings sometimes make their own electricity as a part of

149

15.1

the output of a total energy system. A typical total energy system powers
electric generators with internal combustion engines fueled with
natural gas. The cooling water from the engines is used to heat
domestic hot water or to heat the buildings. The overall eff ic iency of
the system is high because the heat that is incidental to the process
is utilized.
On-site generating units, whether powered by internal-combustion
engines, water, sun, or wind, are generally expensive to buy and
maintain, are of limited capacity when compared with the capacity
we have grown to expect of our electrical systems, and are less
eff ic ient and reliable than central generating plants. They may
also be noisy and smelly; they may be unable to generate steady
alternating current; and they may not be able to provide electricity
when water levels or wind speeds are low, when clouds are present,
or when they break down.
Solid-state photovoltaic panels that convert sunlight directly into
electricity have come down in price to the point that they are being
deployed on the exterior walls or roofs of many new buildings. The
popularity of photovoltaics has also benefited from their availability
in such forms as photovoltaic roof shingles and transparent photo-
voltaic glass. The electrical output of a photovoltaic array is usually
insu f f ic ient to power the bu i ld ing in its entirety, so that supple-
mental electricity must be purchased from the local utility company.
During times when the panels are generating more electricity than
the building can use, the surplus is usually sold back to the utility
company.
Buildings with critical occupancies such as hospitals, scientific
laboratories, and central computer facilities usually contain standby
electric generating units to ma in ta in un in terrup ted power du r ing
power failures. Whenever the electric lines stop bringing electricity
into the building, the generator starts itself automatically and
switches the building from utility power to backup power.
Virtually all electricity is generated as alternating current (AC),
in which the voltage in the wires oscillates back and forth between
maximal values of positive and negative polarity. The frequency of
alternation is 60 cycles per second (Hz) in the United States but is
lower in some countries. The chief advantage of AC electricity over
direct current (DC) is that its voltage is easily and efficiently changed
by means of simple, efficient transformers. Generators put out cur-
rent at many thousands of volts. This voltage is fu r ther increased by
transformers at the generating plant before the electricity is passed
to the main transmission lines, in order to reduce amperage to a
m in imum. When amperages are kept low and voltages are high,
large amounts of energy can be transmitted for very long distances
through relatively small wires with m in imal transmission losses.

150

15.2

15.3

(Amperage is analogous to the volume of water flowing in a pipe.
Voltage is analogous to the pressure of the water.)
Most alternating current is utilized as single-phase electricity,
mean ing that the voltage varies as a single sine wave, reaching zero
twice in each cycle (15.2). For most purposes this pattern is entirely
acceptable, but the more powerful electric motors are relatively large,
bulky, and ineff ic ient when designed to run on the intermittent
pulses of single-phase electricity. For this reason, three-phase AC is
distributed in industrial areas, using three sets of generator coils to
superimpose three sine waves 120° out of phase. This gives a steadier,
smoother flow of energy and enables the use of smaller, more effici-
ent motors (15.3).
Before being passed from long-distance, high-voltage 
trans-
mission lines to local lines for distribution to buildings, electrical
energy is reduced in voltage in local transformer substations (15.4).
This results in somewhat higher transmission losses per mile in
local lines than in long-distance lines, but the local lines cannot be
insulated or protected as heavily as the long-distance lines can.
Furthermore, local lines are much shorter, so that higher transmis-
sion losses per mile do not add up to high losses overall. The voltage
in local lines is still too high for consumer uses, however, so each
bu i ld ing or group of buildings is provided with a small transformer
to reduce the voltage still fu r ther before it enters the building. In
individual dwellings and other small buildings, service is usually
provided at 230 or 240 volts from transformers that are mounted either

w

15.4

on power poles, on the surface of the ground, or in unde rg round
vaults. Large bu i ld ings and bu i ld ing complexes often buy electricity
at local line voltage for more e f f ic ient internal d is tr ibu t ion, reduc ing
its voltage with inside transformers as needed before use.

Electrical Distribution in Small Buildings

Both copper and a lum inum are excellent conductors and are
commonly used as material for electric wires. Copper is a better con-
ductor than a lum inum, but a lum inum wire is somewhat cheaper,
even taking into account that slightly larger wire sizes must be used
than in copper. A disadvantage of a lum inum is that its oxide, un l ike
that of copper, is an electric insulator, and this has caused over-
heating problems and fires in some buildings where a lum inum
wire was improperly connected to fixtures, allowing corrosion to
interfere with cu r rent flow. Copper is generally used for the smaller-
diameter wires that are used in local c ircu i ts w i th in a bu i ld ing,
and a l um i n um is used for the very large-diameter wires.
The electrical system in a small bu i ld ing is quite simple in concept.
Three wires pass overhead or unde rg round from a pole-mounted or
ground-level transformer to the building (15.5). One is a neutral
wire, which means that no electric potential exists between this w ire
and the ground. That is, one could stand on wet soil and touch the
neutral wire with no danger of electric shock. To ensure that this
is so, the neutral w ire is connected firmly to one or more long
copper-covered steel rods driven into the soil near the point
at which the wire enters the bu i ld ing (15.6). The second and third
wires are "hot," energized in such a way that they have a potential of
230 volts between them, but only 115 volts between either of them
and the neutral wire. Before entering the bu i ld ing, the hot wires
pass through an electric meter that measures consumption in units
of kilowatt-hours.
Inside the bu i ld ing, the three wires from the t rans fo rmer enter a
main service panel. The neutral wire is connected to the steel box
housing the panel and to a copper or a lum inum bar to which all
bu i ld ing circuits are grounded. Each of the hot wires, color-coded
black and red on the ir insu la t ing layers, is connected to a copper
or a lum inum bar fitted with connectors by means of wh ich c i rcu it
breakers can be attached. These two bars, carefu l ly insulated from
the grounded panel box and from each other, are conf igured in such
a way that a single circuit breaker connects a single wire to one or
the other of the bars, and a double c i rcu it breaker, occupying two
ad j a c ent panel locations, connects one wire to one bar and one
to the other. By this means, a single c i rcu it breaker enables the
connection of a single ii5-volt or i2O-volt circuit, consisting of a black-

152

15.5

15.6

insulated hot wire connected to the breaker and a white-insulated
neutral wire connected to the metal grounding bar. Depending on
where the breaker is placed in the box, the hot wire for a ii5-volt cir-
cu it may be connected to either the red or black wire coming from
the meter; it is imma ter ial which. A double breaker connects to both
the black and red wires and is used for 23<D-volt or 24o-volt circuits.
(Exact voltages are not critical; d ifferent power companies supply
electricity at slightly d i f fe r ing voltages, and there is always some loss
of voltage in the wires that carry the electricity.) Breakers are easily
installed as needed to connect the various circuits in a bu i ld ing.
Each breaker serves as a convenient on-off switch for maintenance
work on its circuit, in addition to perform ing the important safety
func t ion of automatically shutting off cu r rent to the circuit if for any
reason more current starts flowing than the wire is capable of carry-
ing without overheating and causing a fire. Such a condition can be
caused by too many appliances being plugged in at once or by a
short circuit created by either fau l ty w ir ing or a fau l ty appliance.
There usually are three wires serving any circuit, whe ther 115 volt
or 230 volt: a black-insulated wire, a white-insulated wire, and an
un insu la ted wire connected to the grounding bar in the panel.
These wires must be protected from damage as they pass through
the structure of the bu i ld ing. In wood residential construction, this
is usually done by means of a tough protective plastic sheath hous-
ing all three wires. In heavier types of construction, the wires are
run in steel or plastic pipes called conduits. A conduit offers better
protection to the wires than does a plastic sheath, and in a bu i ld ing
wired through conduits, new wires can be installed by pu l l ing them
through existing conduits, something that is not possible with
plastic-sheathed cable.
At each electrical receptacle, lighting fixture, or switch, a metal or
plastic box must be fastened securely to the structure of the bu i ld ing
to support the device and protect its connections (15.7). Each cable
or condu it is clamped tightly to the box where the wires enter, thus
protecting the wires from being pulled from the ir connections
in case the cable or condu it is disturbed. The bare neutral wire is
connected to the box and to the f rame of the device to ensure that
they will never be able to cause shocks if the device should become
fau l ty. The black and white wires are stripped of insulation at the ir
ends and then are connected to the device by means of screws or
clips. After the circuit is tested for safe, satisfactory operation, the
device is screwed snugly to the box, and a cover plate of metal or
plastic is attached to keep fingers out, to keep the electrical connec-
tions free of dust and dirt, and to provide a neat appearance.
Electrical codes specify a max imum horizontal distance between
receptacles in a room. This is to ensure that a lamp or appliance with

!54

15.7

a standard-length cord can be located anywhere around the peri-
meter of the room without requiring an extension cord. Also specified
are a m in imum number of receptacles per room and a maximum
number of receptacles per circuit in order to avoid overloading the
wires with excessive flows of current.
The sizes of wires used in an electrical system are determined
according to the maximum amount of current to be carried and the
length of wire needed, in order to avoid excessive heating of the wire
and excessive energy loss. Quite slender wires are used for light-duty
circuits at 115 volts, whereas a residential service entrance often uses
wires as thick as one's finger.
A safety device called a ground fault interrupter (GFI) is required in
circuits that serve areas where there is an increased hazard of accid-
ental electric shock, such as bathrooms, kitchens, swimming pools,
and outdoor receptacles. If a GFI senses any leakage of current from
a circuit, no matter how small, it will disconnect the circuit com-
pletely and instantaneously. Arc fault circuit interrupters (AFCIs) are
required on circuits that run to bedrooms, where an electric arc in
a short-circuited electrical device might ignite bed clothing or
draperies. AFCIs disconnect the c ircu it if arcing is detected.

Electrical Systems for Large Buildings

At their extremities, electrical systems in large buildings are much
like the small-scale system just described. A large building has many
local service panels for its various floors and zones, and each such
zone has wiring much like that of a house. When very large quanti-
ties of current must be carried at ordinary voltages to serve a number
of these zones, large rectangular copper or a lum inum bus bars are
used instead of wires, each enclosed in a protective metal duct.
Local panels are then connected to these bars, with wires branching
out in conduits from the panels to local fixtures.
As mentioned earlier, large buildings are usually served with
electricity at higher voltages than the typical 120/240 volt domestic
service. This enables them to buy the electricity at a wholesale rate
and to distribute it around the bu i ld ing at higher voltages with cor-
respondingly higher efficiency. In a very large bu i ld ing, one or more
large transformers reduce the voltage for distribution to local panels,
and additional, small transformers within the building may be used
to facilitate interior long-range distribution at voltages that are inter-
mediate between that of the electricity supplied to the building
and that of final local distribution. Some commercial and industrial
buildings, in addition to 120/240 volt electricity for ordinary pur-
poses, also requ ire electricity at higher voltages such as 277 volts for
lighting fixtures and 440 volts for large electric motors.

155

If the wiring will have to be changed frequently, as it is in some
office bu i ld ings and most compu ter facilities, wires may be run
through special rec tangu lar unde r f loor ducts that are supplied with
numerous access boxes to which fixtures may be easily attached. Some-
times a raised access floor may be provided, made up of small, easily
removable panels of flooring supported by pedestals, below wh ich
conduits may run at random. Designers of any bu i ld ing much larger
than a residence must provide horizontal and vertical spaces for con-
duits, bus ducts, panels, and communications wiring, and maintenance
access for electricians through doors, hatches, or removable pane ls.
Low-voltage wiring, usually at 12 to 14 volts, is f requen t ly used for
doorbell circuits, thermostat circuits, and, through relays, for the
switching of l igh t ing c ircu i ts, especially where complex switching
or remote-control panels are requ ired. The advantage of low-voltage
w ir ing is that it is incapab le of giving severe shocks or causing
fire, so it may be run through a bu i ld ing in lightly insu la ted wires
w i thout using a cable or conduit. Because the required amperages
are also low, the wire itself is small and inexpensive. The cu r rent is
produced by means of a small t rans fo rmer connected to a ii5-volt
circuit. Most telephone and communications wiring is also low
voltage, with cu r rent provided by the commun ica t ions company.
Contemporary commun ica t ions are be ing carr ied increasingly
by fiber optics rather than copper wires. Fiber optic cables are run
through a bu i ld ing ju st as if they were wires.

Other Energy Systems in Buildings

Forms of concentrated energy other than electricity are often piped
into buildings. Fuel gas is the most common of these and is usua l ly
piped directly from wellhead to bu i ld ing. Some bu i ld ings in remote
locations bu rn compressed gas delivered in a liquid state to pressur-
ized tanks that are connected to the bu i ld ing 's gas p ip ing. The
l iqu id boils at ord inary tempera tures and gives off propane and other
gases in a gaseous state. For any type of gas, the p ip ing system is
extremely simple, involving a regulator to step down the high pres-
sure of the ma in or tank, a meter to measure consumption, and
pipes of appropriate sizes to serve the var ious appliances.
High-pressure steam, usually exhaust steam from the local elec-
tric generating plant that is reheated somewhat and distributed
through ma ins and meters to users, is available from unde rg round
mains in many urban areas. It is used by many large bu i ld ings for
heating and absorption cooling, thus avoiding the need to install
ind iv idual boilers and chimneys. At one time, steam also was used to
power elevators, fans, and pumps in buildings, but it has now been
replaced by electricity for near ly all these func t ions.

156

Compressed air is often provided through pipelines to work sta-
tions in shops and factories, where it is used to power portable tools,
clamping devices, and pa int sprayers. Air-powered tools tend to be
cheaper, lighter, and more rugged than their electric equivalents.
The air is usually fu rn ished by an electric-powered compressor on
the premises. Vacuum p ip ing is common in scientific laboratory
buildings. In some urban localities, vacuum lines, compressed-air
lines, or high-pressure water mains for use in driving tools were once
buried beneath the streets as utility systems. Today, electricity, gas,
and steam are the only energy utilities rema in ing in common use.

Further Reading

Ben jam in Stein and John Reynolds. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for
Buildings (gth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2000, pp. 853-1045.

!57

16

Fitting? Buildings to
People

People are the true measure of all things in bu i ld ing. Buildings are
designed by people and built by people for inhabitation by people.
At both ends of the architectural process, the designing and the
inhabiting, the dimensions and movements of the human body are
the ma jor determinants of the shapes and sizes of things. This pre-
sents the problem that people vary a good deal in size, shape, and
mobility. On the average, men are larger than women, and children
come in all sizes (16.1). The average human today is considerably
larger than the average hum an of a cen tury ago, and we grow
measurably with each generation (16.2). There is no such thing as
an "average" h um an figure. Quite average-appearing men vary in
height over a range of at least a foot (300 mm ), and many excep-
tionally tall or short ones fall outside this range. The same is true for
women. Body builds in both sexes vary in bone structure, muscula-
ture, and fat distribution. Young children are much smaller and less
physically coordinated than adults but are more active. Adolescent
children are nearly as large as adults but more active and in many
cases better coordinated. Adults become progressively less agile
through middle age until in later years many are quite restricted
in their motions. Persons of any age, if on crutches, confined to a
wheelchair, or otherwise disabled, are likely to have physical dimen-
sions and requirements very d i f fe rent from those of fu l ly mobile
persons. Given this diverse clientele, then, by which of them should
we measure our buildings?
The easy answer is, we should custom-design each bu i ld ing for
the exact people who will use it. But this is not always possible,
because we must often bu i ld for unknown tenants. Even when we
know intimately the occupants of a bu i ld ing, it is almost certain that
someday they will move elsewhere and a new group of persons of
unknown sizes and shapes will move in.

158

16.1

16.2

16.3

Children present a special problem because they grow. In a
school we can resolve this problem to some extent by scaling differ-
ent classrooms and toilet rooms to different age groups (16.3) while
compromising somehow for the comfort of the adult teachers, but in
a residence a child often grows up in the same room over a period
of many years. A room scaled specifically as a nursery will grow
obsolete as the child ages.
There is no fully satisfactory answer to this dilemma. The best
we can do in most cases is to size building components to accom-
modate the preponderance of the adult population while leaving
a few people of exceptional size or shape, along with the younger
children, in the position of continually having to make accom-
modations to the building. Much of their strain can be eased
through the provision of appropriately scaled furnishings, as seen
especially vividly in the case of children. In residences, libraries,
lounges, and other buildings in which the inhabitants are free to
locate themselves in any of a number of places, spaces of varying
scales and degrees of enclosure may furn ish important oppor-
tunities for persons of different physical and psychic dimensions to
find appropriate surroundings.

Building Dimensions

The dimensions of a building grow ultimately from the dimensions
of the human figure. At the most basic level, a woman sitting in a soft
chair establishes certain important dimensions (16.4). The interior

*59

16.4

16.5

of the chair must be large enough in all d imens ions to support her
body comfortably in any of a numb er of normal sitting postures: feet
on the floor, legs crossed, legs tucked under her body, sitting straight
up, sitting wedged diagonally into a corner of the chair, even sitting
with a leg dang l ing over one armrest. The distance between the seat
cushion and the floor, the angle of the cushion, the angle of the
chair back, and the height and angle of the armrests all are based on
the size and configuration of the average human body, represented
here by a woman. The external dimensions of the cha ir grow from
these dimensions, plus the thickness of structure required to support
the weight of her body and the thickness of padding requ ired to dis-
tribute her weight comfortably across her flesh. Around the chair,
w i th in easy reach ing rad ius of the woman 's arms, are other fu rn ish-
ings: a lamp tall enough to cast light over her shoulder and onto her
book; a magazine rack large enough to contain ord inary read ing
matter, which in tu rn is of a size that comfortably fits her hand and
eye; and a side table at a height that puts a cup of tea w i th in easy
reach (16.5).
The woman rises and walks to the d in ing table. As she moves, her
body sweeps a volume of space that must be ma in ta ined clear of
obstructions. There must be space for her to move beh ind her din-
ing cha ir, space to pu ll out the chair, and space to enter between her
cha ir and the next (16.6). The cha ir must support her comfortably at
a height appropriate for eating, and the table must present the table-
ware and food at a height convenient to her hands and mou th. The
plates and cups are of sizes that will serve the quantities of various
foods that her stomach is expected to hold. The utensils are fitted
dimensionally to her hand and mouth. The dimensions of the tabletop
are worked out so as to accommodate a given numb er of diners,

16.6

160

together with their tableware, elbows, and knees. It is also worked out
to maintain a comfortable distance between people sitting opposite
each other (16.7). Even when people are sitting or standing with no
table between them, they keep distances that allow suff ic ien t ly close
visual and aural contact without encroachment on personal spatial
territories. A dining table or a living room can be too small for com-
fort, thrusting people into intolerable proximity. It can also be too
large, making commun ica t ion d i f f icu l t.
Rooms acquire their dimensions on the basis of such considera-
tions: the dimensions and forms of human bodies, the dimensions
and forms of the necessary pieces of fu rn i tu re, the dimensions
and forms of the volumes swept by moving human bodies, and the
desired distances between people (16.8). Even a television set has its
appropriate distance from its viewer.
In a kitchen, bathroom, or factory, machines acquire at least
equal status with people in determining spatial requirements. The
machines are arranged in a convenient sequence. Each has its own
dimensions: the dimensions swept by its working parts or moving
workpieces and the dimensions swept by the moving bodies of its
operator and its maintainers. The room must provide amply for all
these volumes and fu rn ish other volumes to conduct pipes, hoses,
wires, or ducts to and from the machinery as required.
Some very simple sorts of mechanisms that are universal in build-
ings also demand space for their operation. Sliding drawers and
swinging doors are two ma jor examples in which both the operator
and the mechanism must have space to move freely.
In general, the larger a building is, the more it will cost to build.
Consequently, we usually attempt to make rooms as small as is
consistent with comfort. By relegating specific activities and pieces

161

16.7

16.8

16.9

of furniture to specific places, we can often create a workable
room within remarkably small dimensions. But a compact, carefully
worked-out room arrangement has little or no flexibility. Any change
in fu rn i tu re locations would requ ire enlarging the room. This is
a choice that designers constantly face: a larger room allows for
more subsequent choice and variety in its furnishings, but a smaller
room is generally less costly.
The height of an ordinary room is determined, at m in imum, by
the height of the tallest person normally expected to move through
the room, plus a bit to allow for his hat and a small safety factor
(16.9). But there is much more to it than this. A ceiling may be high
enough to clear the hat but still feel uncomfortably low and oppres-
sive, particularly if the room is large in horizontal extent. In general,
the larger the room is, the higher the m in imum height of a ceiling
must be so as not to appear to bear down on the occupant. Ceiling
height has important effects on air convection and the propagation
of natural light; these factors also tend to indicate higher ceilings for
larger rooms. Primitive houses in subarctic regions are commonly
built with very low ceilings, both to m in im ize heat losses to the
outdoors and give a snug, cozy feeling dur ing the cold winters. In
warm climates, high ceilings allow warm air to dr ift to the ceiling and
comfortably cooler air to pool closer to the floor, where the occup-
ants are. In churches, concert halls, and sports arenas, high ceilings
allow clear lines of sight from all spectators to the performance and
achieve a better distribution and reverberation of sound. The heads
of ordinary windows are usually placed at least high enough that a
standing person can see comfortably to the horizon (16.10). Where
natural light is important, windows often are placed as close to the

16.10

162

ceiling as possible, allowing only for the necessary lintel to support
the wall and floor above. Sill heights of windows are much more
variable. For ordinary purposes, it may be su f f ic ient that the window
reach low enough that one can look out from a sitting position,
or perhaps a bit higher so that one can lean out the window while
resting one's forearms on the sill. It often is important that a table,
chair, or countertop fit against the wall beneath a window. In a room
high above the ground, a higher sill may offer a welcome feeling
of security against tumbling out. In a private room at ground level,
a very high sill keeps out prying eyes. In a window opening onto a
garden, a sill set into the floor allows one to walk directly outside
in pleasant weather.
In the absence of other factors, the perimeter of a building is
shaped by the outermost walls of the most convenient internal
aggregation of rooms. When combining rooms, certain proximities
are important to maintain. A bedroom should be near a bathroom,
without an intervening bedroom or living room. The kitchen should
be near the dining room. Such simple relationships are basic to the
design of any building.
Doorways are necessary to allow access to and from rooms. They
are scaled to accommodate a walking figure, plus a bit more to allow
for carrying a bund le of groceries, a suitcase, or a young child (16.11).
In public buildings, doorways become exitways whose capacity must
be calculated to pass the entire occupant population of the bu i ld ing
in a specified m in imum time.
Corridors are useful for facilitating complex circulation paths
among a number of interrelated rooms. A corridor width of 3 feet
(900 mm) is suff ic ient for a single person, but two people will find it
d i f f icu lt to pass one another. Another foot (300 mm) of width makes
passing easy for two individuals but will not permit the comfortable
passage of two parallel files of people. Corridors must be sized like
water pipes, to accommodate the expected flow. The pipelike char-
acter of many unimaginatively designed corridors has led many
designers to do away with them, substituting instead a seemingly
generous lounge or lobby. Unfortunately, the result is usually little
more than a broader corridor, with circulation paths cutting across
in all directions, leaving little room free for other activities (16.12).
Such situations are easily foreseen by sketching on a floor plan the
natural paths along which people will circulate.

Vertical Movement: Stairs, Ramps, Ladders

Designing for vertical movement of people in and around build-
ings requires extremely careful attention to the dimensions and
peculiarities of the human body. The hazard of tripping and the

i63

16.11

16.12

effort of c l imb ing or descending must be m in im ized by comfortably
accommodating the feet and legs. Handrails must be provided in
such a form and location that they can be easily and securely
grasped, either to assist in climbing or to prevent a vertical fall over
the edge of the stair. And headroom, often a scarce commodity in
stairways, must be at a safe height to protect the brittle and vulner-
able c ran ium from damage (16.13).
Architectural devices for reducing an impossible floor-to-floor
vertical leap to human-sized steps exist in a range that will let us
climb at any angle from the near horizontal to the completely vert-
ical (16.14). R&mps provide a smooth, slow ascent or descent that can
be traversed at any length of stride, or even by a whee lcha ir or baby
carriage. Ramps are particularly effective in exhibit spaces, theaters,
and arenas where large crowds must be accommodated. A ramp
cannot be pitched very steeply, however, before our feet feel in
danger of slipping, par t icu lar ly on the descent. As a result, the ratio
of run to rise for a ramp is very l a rg e— r amps occupy a large amount
of space in a bu i ld ing. Step ramps can rise somewhat more steeply
and economically and are par t icu lar ly pleasant in a garden. Indoors,
we get the unpleasant feeling of possibly slipping on them, as on a
ramp, and also of possibly tr ipp ing, as on a stair, so they should be
avoided. Fixed ladders and step ladders in buildings are generally
restricted to seldom-used access routes to attics, ch imneys, boiler
rooms, and bookshelves or to playful features of children 's rooms
and vacation cottages (16.15). Vertical and near-vertical ladders are
especially hard to negotiate while carrying anything, which fu r ther
restricts their usefulness.
Stairs are the most useful vertical movement devices in a
designer's repertoire. Risers divide the total vertical climb into
small incremen ts that the legs can negotiate comfortably whether
ascending or descending. Treads provide reassuringly level, secure
footholds. The drawbacks of stairs are that they cannot accom-
modate people with various sorts of physical disabilities (ramps or
elevators must be provided instead); they become fa t igu ing af ter
only a few stories of going up or down; and a fa ll on a stairway can
be pa r t icu la r ly damaging because of the nume rous hard edges
presented by the stair nosings.
The danger of fa l l ing on stairs and the potential for fa t igue
are m in im ized if the proportions of the steps are both comfortable
and absolutely uniform throughout the stairway. Even a fractional
increase in the height of one riser in a stair can lead to more acci-
dents. Uncomfor tab ly proportioned stairs are fam i l iar to everyone:
Excessively steep stairs requ ire too much muscu lar effort at each
riser and offer a disturbingly narrow foothold at each tread.
Very shallow stairs induce a m inc ing gait that feels r id icu lous ly

164

16.13A

16.14

16.15

ine f f ic ient (16.16). According to various studies of the proportions
of existing stairways, those stairs whose tread (T) and riser (R) dimen-
sions in inches fit the fo rmu la

2R + T = 25" (or, in SI units, zR + T = 635 mm)

are likely to be both safe and comfortable. Limits must be placed
on the application of this equation. For example, it cannot be used
for the design of monumental stairs with very small risers and very
broad treads; experimentation with full-scale mock-ups is requ ired
in such cases. In stairs of more usual proportions, R should not
exceed 7^ inches (197 mm) in private residential stairs, or 7 inches
(178 mm) in other stairs. T should not be less than 10 inches
(254 mm) for residential stairs, or 11 inches (279 mm) for other stairs.
Residential stairs can be steeper than stairs in public buildings
because they carry less traff ic and are used p r ima r i ly by people who
are fam i l iar with them. Nosings on stair treads are an important
detail; they broaden the foothold significantly without changing

165

16.16

the fundamen tal proportions of the stair. Except in single-family
residences, stair nosings must be profiled with a sloping underside
so that they will not catch the toes of a person who is climbing the
stairs on crutches.
Spiral and winding staircases present special problems because,
even though the ir riser dimensions remain constant across the width
of the stair, the tread dimensions vary considerably. A person walk-
ing close to the inside of a tight spiral stair (a m isnome r—ac tua l ly
it's a helical stair) is on a near-vertical stair with tiny treads, whereas
the outside of the same stair may be excessively broad. For this
reason such stairs are illegal in public buildings. In residences, it is
customary to proportion the treads and risers of such stairs to legal
dimensions at a distance of 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside
handrail, which is the line walked by a single person on the stair
(16.17).
The number of risers in a flight has an important effect on stair
safety and comfort. Flights of fewer than three risers often escape
the notice of un fam i l iar users, who tend to tumble over them before
seeing them. Flights of more than 16 or 18 risers become very tiring
(16.18). Long flights must be broken with periodic landings whose
m in imum dimensions are equal to the width of the stair. The
maximum vertical distance between landings is 12 feet (3.6 m).
Headroom problems in stairs are vexing because they are so often
d i f f icu lt to a v o i d— b ut there is no choice to designers. People often
descend stairs with a very rapid up-and-down movement while
watching their feet to avoid tripping. Tall people are pa in fu l ly
fam i l iar with the damage that may result.

Making Buildings Work

When laying out any of the circulation spaces in buildings—doors,
corridors, stairways—designers have to keep in m ind that fu rn i tu re
and appliances occasionally must pass through the building. That
is, doorways cannot be made so narrow as to exclude refrigerators,
sofas, desks, or pianos. Tight turns in corridors and stairways may be
impassable for such objects unless additional maneuver ing space is
provided.
Lobbies serve several important func t ions in the circulation sys-
tems of buildings. Entrance lobbies let people entering or leaving a
building slow down, button or unbutton outer clothing, think about
where to go next, ad ju st the ir eyes to the new lighting level, fiddle
with umbrellas, comb windblown hair, or wait for taxis or friends.
Theater lobbies serve these func t ions, and they also let members
of the audience exercise their legs between parts of a performance.
A lobby is really an expansion chamber in an otherwise linear flow

166

16.17

16.18

network, a place at which people can step out of the moving stream
and stop for a moment or two.
Outdoors, designers work at a d ifferent scale. People are still
the measure, but now they are walking more rapidly or riding in
vehicles. They need more room to allow for this more rapid
movement and for expanded spatial expectations. Space between
buildings must let sunlight penetrate. Air must circulate freely.
Acoustical and visual privacy must be protected by the distance
between buildings and by the buildings' configuration. Comfortable
walking distances and times become the yardstick for p lann ing local
facilities, and driving times or public transport times measure the
convenience of places in an urban region. At this new scale, unfor-
tunately, the small-scale necessities of people's bodies are often over-
looked by designers. Who has not yearned for a dr ink ing foun ta in,
a comfortable bench, or a pub l ic rest room while in the midst of a
shopping or sightseeing expedition? Who has not felt personally
betrayed by a nameless designer of a city who forgot that people are
human?
Both outside and inside buildings, human safety is an important
design consideration. Buildings can cause accidental damage to
the body in an alarmingly diverse number of ways, some of which
are enumerated in the accompanying chart (16.19). Thousands of
Americans are killed in accidents in buildings each year, and tens
of thousands are in ju r ed, many seriously. Many of these deaths
and in ju r ies could be prevented by more careful design and better
building ma in tenance.
Disabled people are entitled by law to access to public buildings
that is equal to that provided for able-bodied persons. The disabili-
ties covered by this guarantee include loss of sight, loss of hearing,
loss of func t ion in legs or arms, and a host of other physical and
emotional incapacities. The rationale behind the law is compelling:
about one American in six is disabled in some way, and nearly all
of us will experience disability at some time in our lives, perhaps a
broken l imb as a teenager or failing eyesight or decreasing muscle
func t ion as a senior citizen. The consequences for designing circu-
lation spaces in buildings are far reaching, beginning with tactile
and audible signals of various types for those with sensory disabil-
ities. Those with physical disabilities need special parking spaces;
ramped access through curbs and other m inor changes in level;
a convenient, linked system of ramps and elevators for moving
vertically through a building; wider doors; larger vestibules; special
dr ink ing fountains; more ample toilet facilities with grab bars; spe-
cial telephone facilities; lower counters for bank ing and shopping—
the list goes on and on. An architect must learn to design accessible
buildings as a matter of reflex. Circulation paths and facilities for the

167

Some Accidents Caused by Buildings

Bumping Catching Pinching.
L0w headroom
Uncontrolled door ewings
Unprotected door edges
Dxrs that open into traffic
Blind corners in busy corridors
Projecting doorknobs, wiling ends

Cuttingi Scratching, Puncturing^ Skinning.

Sharp edges and corners
Floor-to-ceiling gloss
Projecting nails, screws, bolts
Splinters
Rough surfaces
Falls
Tripping-Low obstacles, uneven floors,
edges of rugs, objects left on floors
Poorly proportioned stairs or ramps
Railings too low or nonexistent
Fbor illumination
Slippery floors or stairs
Loose rugs
Scalding Burning.
Confusing hot-water taps
Unprotected steam or water pipes
Unprotected heating appliances
Stove too close to circulation path
Building fires

Electrocution

Faulty appliances
Faulty wiring

16.1916.19

disabled must flow from his or her pencil as gracefully and naturally
as does any other fea ture of a bu i ld ing design.
A growing group of architects and designers is promoting
universal design, which is a step beyond designing for the disabled.
In universal design, all parts of a bu i ld ing are designed to be usable
by all people, even if on crutches, in a wheelchair, or blind. The key
idea of universal design is that separate but equal special facilities
for the physically handicapped are not suff ic ien t. Rather, one
should eliminate elements of a bu i ld ing that are not usable by every
hum an be ing and substitute for them elements that are.

People as the Measure

As a coda to this chapter, let us recall how people literally became
the measure of bu i ld ings through the traditional English system
of measurement. In each medieval English village, measurements
were standardized to a village pole, the length of the pole being
derived from the right feet of 16 randomly selected men placed
toe-to-heel af ter church on a Sunday morning. A common house of
that period measured i pole by 2. A cord of pole length could be
folded and was therefore useful in subdividing the pole into four
smaller un i ts called yards; a yard was about 4 feet long (1.2 m) at that
time. The same folded cord served to measure a standard pile of
firewood that is still known as a cord. The pile is 4 feet wide by 4 feet
high by 8 feet long (1.2 m x 1.2 m x 2.4 m), the sum of these three
dimensions being equal to the length of the cord.
As textile trade became important in England, the Anglo-Saxon
yard of 4 feet had to be abandoned in favor of the continental cloth
yard of 3 feet (915 mm ), measured along the edge of the cloth
between the tip of the nose and the outstretched arm. The pole, by
now called a rod, was increased to 16.5 feet (5.03 m), or 5.5 cloth
yards. The mile, which originated as 1,000 double steps (mills
passus) of a Roman soldier, was standardized at 320 rods or 8 fu r-
longs (furrow-lengths) of 40 rods each. Land was measured by the
acre (a day's plowing for a yoke of oxen). An acre was later de f ined
legally to be 160 square rods. Later, the mile-square section of 640
acres (259 ha) became the standard of land subdivision in the central
and western United States, and a quarter-section fa rm of 160 acres
(65 ha) was the standard homestead grant.
Meanwhile, a curious progression of circumstances grew out of
the ancient cord measure of firewood. It became standard practice
in England to saw each 4-foot log into three pieces, each 16 inches
(400 mm) long, for easy handling. Fireplace and stove dimensions
were standardized accordingly. When wooden lath came into use
as a base for plaster, it was split from firewood, and so 16 inches

169

16.20

16.21

became the standard spacing for light f ram ing members in build-
ings. From this spacing came, in time, the 4-foot-by-8-foot (1,219 mm
X 2,438 mm) sheet of plywood or gypsum wallboard, which spans
three or six f ram ing modules (depending on which way the sheet is
turned), and from these sheets came the standard 8-foot (2.44 m)
ceiling of today's tract house.
The common bu i ld ing materials became, in the course of history,
rather more directly related to hum an scale. The brick, despite
many small local variations in size, was standardized in medieval
times within a range of sizes and weights that could be easily mani-
pulated by the left hand of a mason, leaving the right hand free
to operate the trowel (16.20). When wood jo inery suddenly became
cheap with the introduction of machine-made nails early in the
nineteenth century, carpenters quickly adopted the easily handled
"2-by~4" as the standard un it of f ram ing (16.21). The heavy timber
frame, which requ ired a large crew simply to handle and fit its
large components, was soon abandoned, and the standard bu i ld ing
crew was reduced to two or three carpenters working only with small,
inexpensive hand tools. Hand-size elements are the traditional
standard in many areas of small bu i ld ing construction, inc lud ing
shingles, wood siding, wood paneling, window glass, and paving
blocks and tiles.
Today we often hand le bu i ld ing materials in bulk rather than by
hand, using mobile mechanical l i f t ing and transporting devices of
impressive capacities. It is often most economical to build using
large-scale materials such as factory-built, room-size housing
modules. There is nothing inherently wrong with these practices,
but designers should be aware that the finished product will not
automatically display the human-scale texture that hand-sized
components have and that occupants often subconsciously iden t ify
with. Designers must also be wary of being forced into unna tu ral
decisions about sizes and proportions of things by the limitations
and capabilities of cranes and trucks of supe rhuman scale.
The metric system of measu rement is not directly related to
human scale. Its basic un it is the meter, originally def ined as one
ten-millionth of the distance from the North Pole to the equator. Its
un it of volume is the liter, a cube one-tenth meter on a side. Its un it
of mass, the kilogram, is the mass of a liter of water. The second is
retained as a measure of time, and the Celsius scale, which divides
the range between the freez ing and boiling points of water into 100
degrees, is the measure of temperature. All other units are derived
from this basic group. Because of its logic and simplicity, the metric
system has been adopted by almost every country of the world
outside the United States. Even in the United States, although most
private projects are designed and built in conventional English

170

units, since 1993 all federal government buildings have been bu i lt
according to metric units of measurement. American-built auto-
mobiles have been metric for decades.
A refinement and rationalization of the metric system, the
Systeme international d'unites (abbreviated SI), is widely used and
is used in this book as an alternative system of units to the English.
The characteristic of SI that is most relevant to architecture is that
the centimeter is not used, only the meter and millimeter. This
avoids any confusion on technical drawings with how big something
is intended to b e—a measurement of 9,000 is either 9 kilometers or
9 meters, and one can usually tell from the context of the project
which it is.
Careful designers work always from a mental catalog of sizes and
proportions of things. Sketches and models from the very earliest
stages of building design include representations of people, furn ish-
ings, and groupings of furn ish ings. Room proportions and window
and door locations are constantly juggled du r ing the design process
to facilitate a variety of appropriate fu rn i tu re placements in a finished
building. Patterns of human circulation are progressively refined
into paths that are short, smooth, logical, and pleasant. These paths
should pass to one side or the other of the d i f fe rent nodes of human
activity within the bu i ld ing instead of cutting through the middle.
Through such a design process and the analytical activities that are
embedded in it, buildings are fitted to people, and people become
the true measure of our buildings.

Further Reading

Ju l ius Panero and N ino Repetto. Anatomy for Interior Designers. New York,
Whitney Publications, 1962.

Charles G. Ramsey, Harold Sleeper, and John Ray Hoke, editors. Architectural
Graphic Standards (loth ed.). New York, Wiley, 2002.

171

17

Providing Structural
Support

Loads and Stresses

A bu i ld ing is constantly be ing pushed and pulled by various forces.
The most constant force is gravity exerting its downward pull on the
fixed components of the bu i ld ing— roo f s, walls, windows, floors,
partitions, stairs, fireplaces—a force referred to as the dead load of
the bu i ld ing. The live loads of the bu i ld ing inc lude the less constant
forces — t he sh if t ing, varying weights of people, fu rn ish ings, goods,
and vehicles; the weight of snow on the roof; the pressures (pre-
dom inan t ly hor izon ta l) of wind on the walls. Ear thquakes, wh ich
cause rapidly fluctuating horizontal displacements of the ground on
wh ich a bu i ld ing stands, also cause horizontal live loads. We must
con f igu re every bu i ld ing in such a way that it will support its own
dead load plus a live load equal to the worst combined total of
people, furn ish ings, snow, w ind, and ear thquake that may reason-
ably be expected.
To do this, we first estimate the magn i tude of these loads, which
is usua l ly an e lemen tary ar i thme t ical chore. However, bu i ld ings of
unusual he ight or in unu sua l ly w indy locations may requ ire exten-
sive measurements on the site and in a wind tunnel to de term ine
what the actual wind loads will be. Next, we select a combination of
related structural d ev i c e s—a structural sys tem— that is appropriate
to the site, the uses to be made of the bu i ld ing, and the expected
loads. Finally, we determine the exact configurations and necessary
strengths and sizes of the components of the structural system,
inc lud ing all the fas ten ing devices used to hold the larger compon-
ents together. A glance at any bu i ld ing und er construction is likely
to lead to the conclusion, largely correct, that the detailed design of

172

a structural system is a rather involved process. At its roots, however,
s truc tural design springs from a few very simple concepts. No struc-
ture is built that does not stand on these concepts. The depth and
complexity of structural design processes lie in the skill with which
we select, combine, and proportion structural devices and translate
them into buildable form, not in the basic behavior of the devices
themselves.
Consider a block of ma te r ia l— l imes tone, let us s ay— and what
happens to it as a downward load is applied un i fo rm ly across its
upper surface (17.1). The load pushes down on the block from
above, and the surface below the block pushes upward with an equal
force. The block is being compressed. The compressive stress at
the top face of the stone block is equal to the load divided by the
horizontal cross-sectional area of the block:

Compressive stress =

load
area

If the load is 3,000 pounds and the block is 10 by 15 inches, the com-
pressive stress will be equal to 3,000 pounds divided by 150 square
inches, or 20 pounds per square inch. In SI units, this example
would translate as a force of 13.3 kilonewtons divided by 0.097 m2,
which equals 137.4 megapascals (MPa). (At the bottom face of the
block, the stress is h igher than at the top, because the load at the
bottom includes the weight of the stone block as well as the applied
load.) This concept of stress is useful because it allows us to compare
the intensity of structural actions in blocks of d i f fe r ing sizes and
shapes under d i f fe r ing loads.
Suppose now that the load on the block is gradually increased by
p i l ing more weight on the top. The compressive stress will rise in
proportion to the weight. If we have extremely accurate measuring
equipment, we can observe that the height of the block is gradually
diminished by very small but finite amounts as the load is increased.
If we plot a graph of the compressive stress versus this d im inu t ion
(which is called strain), it will be a straight line, telling us that stress is
directly proportional to strain (17.2). The slope of the l i n e— t he ratio
of stress to s t r a in— is known as the elastic modulus of the material.
Elastic moduli have been determined experimentally for all the
common structural materials, giving us a ready means of predicting
how much a wall or column will shorten under a given load, or how
much a steel rod that is being pulled will lengthen (17.3). The term
elastic also implies that if the load is removed from the block, wall,
column, or rod, it will spring back to its original size, w i thout loss of
dimension.

17.1

17.2

173

17.3

If we continue to increase the loads on the block, the material
w i th in the block will ultimately be squeezed beyond its capacity
to resist. The material will crush and will not re turn to its original
size af ter the load is removed. The stress at which this occurs is
known as the yield point of the material. In a brittle material such
as stone, the yield point is also the point at which the material
disintegrates. It is dangerous to design a bu i ld ing structure to be
stressed to the yield point, because any tiny additional load, any
m inu te flaw in the material, or any slight miscalculation may
make the bu i ld ing collapse. To account for these uncertainties, we
normally design structures with a factor of safety. A factor of safety
of two means that we design to a stress that is just half of the yield
point. A factor of three means we use one-third this stress, and
so on. We use lower factors of safety for materials that tend to be
relatively consistent in quality, such as steel, and higher factors for
materials, such as wood, that are na tura l ly inconsistent and flawed.
We mu l t ip ly yield point stresses from laboratory load-test data by
factors of safety to calculate standard safe allowable stresses for
various structural materials.
Suppose that in a laboratory test our stone block has crushed at
a stress of 3,600 pounds per square inch (24.82 MPa). For purposes
of design, we will apply a factor of safety of three to this stress to
allow for possible flaws and inconsistencies in the stone. This results
in an allowable stress of 1,200 pounds per square inch (8.27 MPa). If
we were asked to design a stone block to support a load of 60 tons
(54,480 kg), we could do so as follows:

In SI units:

A stone 10 inches square (254 mm x 254 mm) will do the job.
This simple procedure is the basis for all structural calculations. The
design of even the most complicated structure ultimately comes
down to a question of whether a given piece of material can safely
carry a given level of stress, either a squeezing stress (compression) or
a stretching stress (tension).

*74

Vertical Support

We can build many kinds of structures with simple blocks of stone,
concrete, or brick. A vertical stack of blocks forms a column capable
of supporting a portion of a floor or roof. A column translated in
a horizontal direction becomes a bearing wall, which can support
the load of an entire edge of a floor or roof (17.4). Provided that such
columns or bearing walls are not too slender in relationship to their
height, their thicknesses can be computed in the same simple
manner as in the preceding example (17.5-17.7).

17.4

17.7

17.5

17.6

!75

If a column or wall is very slender, it will buckle at a stress that
is well below the allowable stress (17.8). Buckling is a lateral dis-
p lacement whose causes and mathematics are still not completely
understood, especially in co lumns that are neither extremely
slender nor extremely thick. Short, squat co lumns and walls crush
before buckling, and very tall, slender ones consistently buckle
before crushing, but ones of intermediate length and slenderness
may fa il in either manne r. Consequently, we rely largely on for-
mu las derived from laboratory test data when designing columns of
in termed ia te slenderness.
A co lumn or wall that tends to buckle can be made safe by being
thickened suff ic ien t ly or by being braced laterally with compressive
struts or tensile guys (17.9). A laterally braced column has the advan-
tage of using considerably less total material to support the same load
as a thick, unbraced column. We use braced columns f requen t ly in
buildings, radio towers, and many other types of s truc ture.
Buck l ing is a problem only in structural elements that are under
compressive stress. Elements under tensile stress, such as ropes, cables,
rods, and chains, have no tendency to buckle. Consider a cha in
hang ing vertically with a weight attached to its lower end (17.10).
The tensile stress on the cha in is equal to the applied weight divided
by the cross-sectional area of steel in any single l ink. The strain, up

17.8

17.9

17.10

176

to the yield point of the steel in the chain, is proportional to the
stress. The chain will never buckle as long as it is in tension.
Steel is the strongest structural material in both tension and com-
pression. Wood also has both good tensile and good compressive
strength. Though wood is not as strong as steel, its ratio of strength
to weight is roughly the same. Concrete and masonry materials are
strong in compression, but they are brittle, which means that they
crack and come apart when subjected to moderate tensile stress.
Steel rods are often embedded in the regions of concrete and masonry
structures where tensile stresses are anticipated, to produce a strong,
economical structure that is a composite of the two materials.

Horizontal Spanning: Tension Devices

Vertical loads in buildings can be supported in compression by
columns or bearing walls, or in tension by chains, rods, or cables.
Except in some cases of column buckling, the behavior of these
structural devices is well understood. The greater structural problem
in most buildings, however, is to span horizontally over space, to
support roofs and floors. How do we do it? There are many ways.
We begin with a simple example: Suppose that we hang a cha in
across a narrow canyon and suspend a very heavy weight from its
center (17.11). The two halves of the chain become very nearly two

17.11

177

17.12

straight lines, converging at the point where the weight is applied.
The ends of the chain will pull on the cliffs at either side at an angle
(a), which is determined by the length of chain we have provided
(17.12). As we examine what happens at the center of the chain, we
note that the two halves of the chain cannot be exerting a direct
upward pull against the weight; a chain can pull only along the axis
(cen ter l ine) of its links. Therefore it must be resisting the downward
pull of the weight with two diagonal pulls at angles (a) from the
horizontal. The diagonal pulls, Tj and T2, each must have a vertical
component, Tsina, equal to half the pull of the weight. At each cliff,
this vertical component is transferred into the rock. But so is an
accompanying horizontal component, Tcosa. The chain cannot
support a load across a span without exerting a horizontal as well
as a vertical pull on its supports. We can see this more easily if we
support the ends of the cha in on two slender poles instead of two
c l iffs (17.13). The poles bend inward under the load. A common way

i78

17.13

17.14

of dealing with this horizontal pull, in suspension bridges or tents,
is to run the cha in (or cable or rope) over the poles or co lumns at
each end and down to anchors in the ground some distance outside
each co lumn. The chains outside the columns provide a horizontal
pull equal to the pull of the chain between the columns. They also,
unavoidably, add a substantial vertical load to each of the columns,
and so the co lumns must be strengthened accordingly.
Let us go back again to the problem of spanning the canyon. The
cha in is attached directly to the rock at each end and exerts its
inward pull on the rock rather than the tops of columns. Observe
what happens if we use a longer chain. The angle (a) is increased.
The vertical component of pull on the c l i f fs stays the same, but the
horizontal component 
is d im in ished, and so are the pull and
the stress in the cha in. Conversely, if the chain is shortened, the
horizontal pull on the cliffs will be increased, and the chain will be
tensed much more tightly (17.14). An important decision in design-
ing any horizontal spanning device, not ju st a hanging cha in, is how
deep the device should be. A deep device, such as a deeply sagging
chain or a deep truss or beam, has lower internal structural stresses
and thus needs less material to carry the same load than does a
shallow device, which always has higher internal stresses and needs
more material. In practice, however, we often choose the shallower
devices because they requ ire less vertical space in a building and
thus save money on columns, exterior walls, and other components.
What happens if we add more loads to the cha in, spacing them
out at various intervals along its length? Each time another load is
added, the chain ad jus ts its shape to ma in ta in a line of pure tension
along its axis at every point. The loads may be unequal in weight
or unequa l ly distributed along the length of the chain; the cha in
changes shape automatically to place each of its links in equ i l ib r ium

179

17.15

17.16

under any loading short of its breaking point (17.15). We cannot
force a chain to take an arbitrary shape but must work with the
shapes a chain takes naturally. The most fam i l iar shape of all is the
catenary, the graceful curve taken by a chain hanging freely under
its own weight (17.16). Each link represents a resolved trio o f fe rees
in equ i l ibr ium, two exerted at an obtuse angle to each other by the
two adjacent links, and the third exerted downward by the weight of
the link itself.
The curve of the cable in a suspension bridge differs slightly from
a catenary because the weight of the bridge is distributed evenly
over the horizontal plane of the roadway that hangs from the cable,
not over the curving length of the cable. The resulting curve is a
parabola.
The shapes taken by a hanging cable or chain are called funicular
shapes, after the Latin word for "string." For each pattern of loads,
there is a family of funicular shapes, the shapes that a piece of

180

hanging string would take when subjected to that load pattern. For
a cable hanging under its own weight only, the fun icu lar shapes
comprise an infinitely large family of catenaries, because the cable
can sag a little, a lot, or anything in between. For a suspension bridge,
the possible fun icu lar shapes make up a fam i ly of parabolas. Over
the past several pages and in the accompanying drawing (17.17),
we also see shapes that are fun icu lar for a single load and several
random loads. Some of these shapes are on level supports, and
others are on uneven supports.
Tents represent the principle of the fun icu lar in a three-
dimensional form, using cloth on a very small scale, high-tech syn-
thetic fabrics at large scale, or networks of steel cables on a very large
scale, to cover space (17.18, 17.19). Extremely long spans between
supports are possible if the masts are high enough to accommodate
the necessary depth of sag in the fabr ic and if the fabric is sufficiently
tense to prevent billowing or fluttering in the wind. Such tension
can be provided by ropes or cables that pull the fabric down at vari-
ous points, by applying sufficient weight to the fabric, or by giving an
anticlastic curvature (convex along one axis and concave along the
other) to the fabric.

17.17

17.19

17.18

181

17.20

Arches

What happens if we put the chain aside and instead try to support
the weight in the middle of the canyon with stone blocks? We could
do this by leaning the blocks against each other, upward and across
the chasm in just the right conf igura t ion so that each block would
be in equ i l ib r ium with its immediate neighbors. There are various
mathematical and geometrical techniques for finding this con-
figuration. There is also an easier way: modeling it to scale with a
length of watch cha in, key cha in, or even cotton string suspended
over a piece of paper that is attached to a vertical surface. Remember
that in a cha in, each link is in equ i l ib r ium, its own weight and
the vertical components of force from the link on either side just
being equa l. This is exactly what we want in each block of our stone
device, the only d i f fe rence being that a chain can carry only tension,
whereas we want our stones, wh ich are weak in tension, to carry
only compression. The solution, then, is to model the situation on
a small scale with a weight suspended from a chain. We need to
attach a number of small weights to the chain to simulate the weight
of the stones (17.20).
The cha in and weights in our hang ing model quickly reach equi-
l ib r ium, after which we can trace the form taken by the chain onto
a sheet of paper, invert the sheet of paper, and lay out a series of
stone blocks whose centerline assumes the same form as the cha in
(17.21). The result will be a fun icu lar arch perfectly formed to carry
the given load by means of pure compression within and between
the stones.
If you have never seen an arch of exactly this shape, it is because
few arches are bu i lt to take a single, concentrated load. Most are
built to carry un i fo rm ly distributed loads and should, therefore, take
the fo rm of a parabola, as we see in many arch bridges (17.22). In
buildings, most arches are not parabolic but semicircular, for arches
are much easier to lay out as arcs of circles than as parabolas. If the
span is not too great, the stones of the arch (the voussoirs) are deep

182

17.21

17.22

enough to contain a parabolic curve, and the arch is stiffened by
containment within a wall; such simpler arches are quite stable
(17.23). Fur thermore, because it was not known un t il Renaissance
times that the parabola was the ideal shape for a un i fo rm ly loaded
a rch, all the classical arches of Roman civilization, which we have
copied so fa i th fu l ly through subsequent epochs, are based on circles
(17.24). The Romans even used a flat arch, a form so apparently
wrong that we are tempted to doubt its stability until we see it
carrying a load without apparent distress. Then we might visualize a
rather flat parabola superimposed on its stones.
It is important to note the mirror-image similarity between the
forms developed previously with hanging chains and the fun icu lar
arch forms illustrated here. The arch to support each loading condi-
tion d i f fe rs slightly from its chain analogue in that the greater dead
weight of the arch itself with respect to the superimposed weight or
weights may require a slightly d ifferent curvature of form. Notice
also that every arch exerts a horizontal force, exactly as a cha in does,

17.23

17.24

is.

17.25

but in the opposite direction (17.25). The amount of horizontal
thrust and the amount of compressive stress within the material of
the arch depend on the amount of rise given to the arch. The flatter
the arch is, the higher the horizontal thrust and the higher the inter-
nal forces in the voussoirs will be. Once again we encounter the
principle that deeper structural devices have lower forces.
In important respects, the arch is not an exact analogue of the
chain. The arch is rigid and cannot self-adjust to changing load
patterns as a chain does. Being in compression, an arch can fail by
buckling. For both these reasons, an arch cannot be made nearly
as slender as a chain or cable. A relatively thick arch is not only
more resistant to buckling than a slender one, but also can carry
comfortably loads that vary a good deal from the exact loading for
which it was shaped. For these two reasons, also, the arch form does
not have as great an ultimate spanning capability as does a hanging
cable, although it is runner-up to the cable as the longest-span
device in the designer's structural vocabulary, especially when it is
made of steel.
In both Europe and the Middle East, the arch form underwent
enormous development and elaboration over the last two millennia.
Today we are able to make many useful forms, both two dimen-
sional and three dimensional, from the arch, some of which are
illustrated here (17.26). Most arched forms of construction need
some sort of temporary support (called centering or formwork} dur ing
construction. Many materials, including all the masonry materials,
concrete, cast iron, steel, and wood, are suitable for arches, vaults,
and domes.
The need to resist the horizontal thrust component of arches and
vaults has given rise to many ingenious architectural devices. In a

184

line of development driven by the desire to open churches to as
much natural light as possible, the simple, heavy masonry engaged
buttresses of early times became the breathtaking flying buttresses
of the Gothic era, in which the downward gravitational thrust of
heavy stone pinnacles inexorably diverts the outward thrust of
the vaults until it safely enters the ground through the foundations
(17.27, 17.28). In Renaissance times, as wrought iron became avail-
able, tie rods or chains came into use as an inexpensive (but usually
less handsome) alternative to buttresses for all kinds of vaults and
domes (17.29).
The availability of new and stronger structural materials in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries brought a new wave of develop-
ment in vaulting techniques. Vaults and domes of metal trusswork

i85

17.26

17.27

can span vast amoun ts of space, using little more material than
suspension structures of equal expanse (17.30). Vaults of re inforced
concrete or clay tiles, often proportionally th inner than the shell
of an egg, have become commonplace, and their designers have
exploited not only the synclastic, spherical geometry of traditional
vau l t ing but the anticlastic curve of the hyperbolic paraboloid as
well (17.31).

Thrust-Free Spanning Devices: Trusses

We have developed so far the concepts of the hanging cha in, the
arch, and the tie cha in. Let us now see if we can assemble from
these components other ways to span the canyon, trying especially
to develop devices that exert no horizontal pu ll or push on the
canyon walls. Such thrust-free devices would be par t icu lar ly useful
in bu i ld ings, allowing the columns and bear ing walls to support
only vertical loads.
We will begin again with the hang ing cha in that supports a single
load at its center, but this time we will connect the ends of the cha in
to the ends of a very shallow arch whose only func t ion, besides
supporting its own weight, is to coun teract with its outward push the

17.30

186

17.28

17.29

inward pull of the chain (17.32). If this device is properly shaped, we
can prove that it exerts no horizontal thrust by moun t ing one end
of it on rollers, so it is free to move back and for th. If the rollers do
not move, our design is a good one.
If we wish to support the load at a level that is roughly the same
as the rim of the canyon, rather than have it hang down into the
canyon below the arch, we can do this by transmitting the load from
the weight down to the chain through a column of stone blocks
(17.33). The smgle arch from the previous figure is made into two
shorter ones, each shaped for a combination of its own dead weight
and the horizontal component of compression that is added by
the chain.
Though we could actually make this device of stones and chain,
it would be somewhat clumsy, and in practice it would be easier to
replace the stones with short compression struts of wood, bolted
loosely together at their junc t ions (17.34). It can now be seen more
easily that what we have invented is a simple truss.

17.31

17.32

17.33

17.34

1587

17.35

17.36

17.37

17.38

17.39

We could make a truss to support two concentrated loads, as
shown (17.35). I*8 equ i l ibr ium is somewhat precarious, however,
because the withdrawal of one of the loads will allow the upper line
of struts, called the upper chord of the truss, to buckle upward. The
addition of two diagonal chains in the center panel eliminates this
possibility (17.36).
An ideal truss for three concentrated loads can be developed
similarly (17.37). This truss is very eff ic ient mechanically, but it
would be easier to build if all the vertical struts were the same
length. We can do this by inserting diagonal ties or struts in each
panel of the truss to ensure equ i l ibr ium (17.38, 17.39). Notice that
any diagonal member may be replaced by either a tension tie or
a compression strut, depending on the orientation given to the
m emb e r—one must be placed on the opposite diagonal of each
panel from the other. By this means we can produce stable trusses of
any desired number of panels, although an even number of panels
has the advantage of producing a symmetrical truss without the
need for two diagonals in a center panel.
We can also invert all these trusses ( turn them upside down).
When we do this, all tension members become compression
members, and vice versa (17.40). This is fur ther evidence of the
invertibility of any structure that we discovered when we inverted
a chain to produce an arch.
Many d ifferent types of trusses have been developed (17.41).
Trusses are relatively easy to design and to analyze mathematically,

17.40

188

King Post

Queen Post

Town or Lattice

Warren

Bowstring

Pratt

Howe

Fink

Flat Pratt

Flat Howe

Fan Fink

Some Forms of Trusses 

scissors

17.41

17.42

17.43

17.44

17.45

17.46

can be made up of short pieces of material, are relatively light in
weight, and can be bu i lt of wood, steel, a lum inum, or concrete with
equal ease. Their three-dimensional counterpart, the space frame,
has also come into common use in recent decades (17.42). Trusses
and space frames are theoretically capab le of spans almost as great as
those of arches and vaults, though they cannot approach the very
long spans that are possible with hang ing s truc tures.
With trusses, as with arches and hang ing s truc tures, greater depth
means lower stresses and, in general, greater economy of construc-
tion. But again, we may choose to use shallower trusses to make the
bu i ld ing more compact and economize on other costs of bu i ld ing.
Let us investigate what happens as the depth of a simple truss is
progressively d im in ished.
In the wooden truss shown in 17.43, we no*e ma^ me weight of
the load is carried through the vertical strut to the cha in. The chain
carries the load to the end supports, and the hor izon tal struts serve
only to resist in compression the horizontal pull of the cha in.
If we shorten the vertical strut (17.44), me angl£ (a) of the cha in
will decrease, and both the ho r izon tal pull of the chain and the
tension in the cha in will increase. We must use a thicker cha in and
thicker horizontal struts, but the vertical strut in the center of the
truss still will carry only a force equal to the superimposed load, so it
can stay the same. If we shorten the vertical s trut still fu r ther (17.45),
the cha in must become still th icker, as must the top struts. As the
truss gets very shallow, forces rise extremely rapidly with each suc-
cessive reduc t ion in depth. A useful l im i t ing case is reached when
the depth of the wooden top struts requ ired to resist the thrust of the
chain w i thout buck l ing is about the same as the overall depth of the
truss (17.46). In ternal forces in the truss are h igh, but they are w i th in
the capability of ord inary s truc tural materials to resist. The vertical
strut can be eliminated entirely, with the center of the cha in being
bolted directly to the wood of the horizontal struts. What we have
arrived at is a truss of m in imum practical depth. It is not very
e f f ic ient s truc tura l ly because it uses far more steel and wood than
a deeper truss would, but it is compact, and in a bu i ld ing it would
produce both a flat floor above and a flat ceiling below, resulting in
a max imum economy of space. What we have produced is, in fact, a
form of beam, one designed specifically for the purpose of carrying
only a single, concentrated load at its m idpo in t.

Beams

In order to arrive at a beam conf igura t ion that would be appropriate
for a load that is distributed un i fo rm ly along the span of the beam,
the sort of load for wh ich we norma l ly design the structural

190

members of the floor or roof of a bu i ld ing, we start with a truss that
is made up of two ideally shaped members for un i fo rm loadings, a
parabolic arch above and a hang ing cha in below. We make the arch
an exact mirror image of the chain. If the two are connected at all
points by a very large number of ties, each will carry half the load,
and the horizontal pushes and pulls will balance each other exactly
at the two ends, so that no horizontal thrust will be imparted to the
supports (17.47).
Then we build another, shallower truss (17.48). As expected, both
the arch and the cha in must thicken as the depth of the truss is
reduced and the horizontal forces grow. Ultimately, reaching the
useful l im i t ing case, the arch can become flat and still support itself
and its half of the load (17.49). The c n am> however, must retain
some sag if it is to carry directly its portion of the load. The form we
have arrived at is exactly the form taken by a post-tensioned concrete
beam, in which tightly tensioned steel cables pull against the ends of
a concrete beam, following a flat parabolic curve between (17.50).
We know from everyday experience, of course, that a beam can
be much simpler than either of the types we have developed here.
A length of wood of the appropriate depth and thickness does the
trick quite nicely, without the need for fussing with chains or stone
blocks (17.51). What is interesting about a plain beam of wood or
steel, however, is how the forces of tension and compression operate
within it. Analysis of the principal stresses in beams shows that a
beam func t ions by means of both compressive stresses that follow
lines similar to arches and tensile stresses that follow lines similar to
hanging chains. The two sets of lines are mirror images of each other

17.51

191

17.47

17.48

17.49

17.50

17.52

17.53

17.54

and are symmetrically arranged so that the horizontal pushes of the
"arches" are exactly balanced by the horizontal pulls of the "chains"
(17.52). Notice how the lines bunch together at the top and bottom
of the beam in the middle of the sp an— the tension and compression
stresses are highest in these areas, and the material in these areas of
a well-designed beam is tensioned and compressed to the allowable
stress of the material. In the rest of the beam, however, stresses are
lower. The material is not working to its fu ll structural capacity and
in this sense is being partially wasted. For this reason, a beam is not
nearly as efficient a structural form as a hanging cable, an arch, or a
truss is, in which most or all of the material is fu l ly stressed. But a
beam is compact and convenient to work with, exerts no external
horizontal thrust, and easily produces flat ceilings and floors.
The 
lines of principal stress in a beam 
indicate another
phenomenon that is of interest. Notice that whenever a line of
compression and a line of tension cross, they do so at right angles.
If we examine a small block of material taken from one of these
intersections, we see that it is compressed across one diagonal and
pulled across the other (17.53). These diagonal forces become very
large near the ends of a beam, and sometimes they are more critical
than any other stresses at the ends of the beam, where the lines
of principal stress intersect at an angle of 45° to the horizontal, and
progressively lower toward the middle of the beam. Thus a beam
must be designed to resist not only heavy horizontal tensile and
compressive stresses at its upper and lower faces in the middle of the
span but also heavy diagonal stresses at the ends. These stresses in
the end regions are seldom a problem in steel beams because steel is
relatively strong against diagonal stresses, but wood and concrete
beams are weaker in this regard. They requ ire special care in design
and construction of their end regions.
The part of a beam where compressive stresses are highest is sub-
ject to buckling, like any structural device that carries compression.
As one would expect, the longer and more slender the beam is, the
higher the risk of buckling will be (17.54). Empirical formu las have
been developed to predict this risk, and where a risk of buckling is
present, either the beam must be made thicker, or lateral bracing
must be provided, much as for a column. Such bracing can often
be furn ished conveniently by the floor or roof deck that is carried by
the beam.
In beams, as in all spanning devices, it is important that we be
able to predict how much the beam will deflect (sag) under its
expected loading. Rather exact formulas have been developed for
this purpose. By knowing in advance what the deflection will be, we
can design beams that are stiff enough to feel solid underfoot and
that will not bend so much as to crack plaster ceilings that are affixed

192

17.56

17.56

to them or to apply force to windows, partitions, and other building
components beneath them that are not designed to carry ma jor
structural loads. We can also camber a beam— that is, we can build
into it an upward curvature equal to the expected deflection under
load, so that it will be flat when in use (17.55).
We use beams in many d ifferent ways. To this point, we have
been discussing what are called simply supported beams, which have
a support at each end and deflect downward under a gravity load.
Frequently, a single, continuous beam is placed across two or more
ad jacent spans as a single piece or is cantilevered beyond its sup-
ports at one or both ends (17.56). Such configurations introduce
bending in the opposite direction over the supports. By efficiently
stressing more of the beam material to its maximum, continuity

*93

17.58

17.59

17.57

allows the use of a smaller, less expensive beam than would have to
be used if only simply supported spans were employed.
Beams are used in sloping planes as roof rafters. If a rafter is
supported vertically at both its ends, it does not exert any horizontal
thrust (17.57). However, if two rafters are set against each other from
opposite walls of the bu i ld ing without a center support, they will act
as a simple arch. Each thrusts the other horizontally, and so a tie or
buttresses must be provided.
In reinforced concrete construction, most or all of the compressive
forces are resisted by the concrete, with round steel bars located so
that they resist all the tensile forces. Re in fo rcement against the
strong diagonal forces near the ends of the beam is provided by
vertical stirrups of steel bars (17.58).
For max imum economy, con t inuous spans are almost always
used in concrete bu i ld ing frames. The heaviest concentrations
of steel bars alternate between the bottoms and tops of the beams
as the direction of bending changes. Wind and earthquake forces
can cause the directions of bend ing in the beams of a bu i ld ing
to reverse, so in most cases at least some of the steel re in fo rc ing bars
are installed over the fu ll length of the beam at both the top and the
bottom (17.59).

194

Slabs

A concrete slab is a very broad, shallow, reinforced concrete beam
(17.60). If a concrete slab spans between two parallel beams or walls,
it is reinforced pr imar i ly in the direction of spanning and is termed
a one-way slab. If a concrete slab spans between columns arranged
in a more-or-less square pattern, it is reinforced in two directions
(both north-south and east-west) and spans in two mutually per-
pend icu lar directions at the same time. This two-way slab needs
less concrete and re inforc ing steel to support a given load than a
one-way slab and is therefore used whenever possible. For longer
spans in either one-way or two-way concrete slabs, fu r ther economies
can be gained by leaving out much of the concrete between the
reinforcing bars in the bottom of the slab, to form a one-way concrete
joist system (also known as a ribbed slab) or a two-way concrete joist
system (waffle slab). In this way, the slab can grow much deeper
without becoming much heavier.
For max imum economy of concrete and steel, the re inforc ing
steel in slabs and beams is often post-tensioned. This requires special
high-strength steel re inforc ing cables that are encased in plastic
tubes. The space between the cables and the tubes is filled with an
anticorrosive lubricant. The tubes with their cables are placed in the
formwork. Heavy wire chairs support them along fun icu lar lines of
tension. The concrete is poured around them. After the concrete

!95

17.60

17.61

17.62

17.63

hardens, hyd rau l ic jacks are used to tighten all the cables to very
high stresses. Because the cables were given fun icu lar curves at the
time they were placed, they support the loads on the beams and
slabs very efficiently (17.61). The concrete around them acts in hor-
izontal compression to resist the horizontal pull of the cables.

Other Types of Beams

Large beams for heavy loads and long spans are often custom manu-
fac tured of concrete, steel, or laminated wood, in such a way that
more material is provided where stresses are highest. A welded steel
plate girder, for instance, has extra top and bottom plates to resist
peak values of tension and compression at midspan, and extra
vertical stiffeners to re inforce against shear at the ends (17.62).
A beam is not always straight. For longer spans, it is frequently
advantageous to make a bent beam called a rigid frame, a combined
column and beam with a stiff jo int between (17.63). The jo int (the
point where the f rame changes from vertical to sloping) carries very
high stresses and is usua l ly thickened accordingly. A rigid frame
behaves like both a beam and an arch and must therefore be tied
together at the base. This is usually done by means of a steel rod
buried in the concrete floor slab.
Rigid frames are capable of max imum spans approaching those of
trusses. Beams generally are restricted to shorter spans. The deeper
the beam is, the longer the span can be, but beams become
cumbersome and uneconomical to build at spans well below those
that are easily constructed using lighter, more efficient structural
forms such as cables, arches, and trusses.
If a flat plane of structural material, usually reinforced concrete,
is folded or scalloped to increase its overall depth, it becomes

196

capable of spanning fairly long distances and will act in much the
same manner as a deep beam does (17.64). The structural behavior
of such forms is easily modeled by folding or scalloping a sheet of
paper, supporting it across two books, and loading it with other
sheets of paper.

Corbels

A corbel is a structural device composed of a number of stones or
bricks, each of which acts as a small, stubby cantilever beam (17.65).
For its stability, it depends on having the total leverage of the weight
that bears on the back end of each block exceed the total leverage
of the weight bearing on the projecting portion of the same block.
The simple corbel is sometimes used to span window openings
in walls or to form projecting brackets on masonry bearing walls
to support beams (17.66). It is frequen t ly used in decorative brick-
work. Translated into the third dimension as a linear corbeled vault,
it was used by the Mayas and other ancient cultures to span narrow
rooms (17.67). Its spanning capacity is the most limited of any
structural form, however, because the heavy stones or bricks of
which it is built are weak in tension and because it uses large
quantities of material, compared with other devices that can carry
equal loads over equal spans.
Somewhat greater spans are possible, with somewhat more
efficient use of material, if a corbel is rotated about its vertical center-
line to form a tholos (17.68). The tholos employs more than just the
corbel principle, however; each of its horizontal rings of stones or
bricks acts as a full-circle horizontal arch to resist its own ten-
dency to fall inward under the weight coming from above. Thus the
tholos, unlike the other corbeled forms, does exert a thrust that must
be resisted in its foundations or supporting walls, but it retains the
advantage of all corbeled forms that it can be erected without the

17.67

197

17.64

17.65

17.66

17.68

17.69

use of temporary support or formwork. It is superior to its corbeled
cousins in its absence of need for a massive coun terba lanc ing
weight. It need be only one stone thick. In ancient Mycenaean tombs
the tholos spans as much as 47 feet (14.3 m) while supporting a heavy
load of earth from above. Spans of 10 to 20 feet (3 m to 6 m) are com-
monplace in other Med i terranean areas, par t icu lar ly southern Italy,
where the form was used un t il a few decades ago to construct roofs
of farmhouses (17.69).

Pneumatic Structures

A diverse group of spanning devices whose potential has only begun
to be tapped are the fluid-filled structures. Air is the fluid most
widely used. The two categories most often constructed are air-
inflated structures and air-supported structures (17.70), which are

17.70

198

called collectively pneumatic structures. In air-inflated structures,
structural members are made of fabr ic tubes or lenses braced against
buck l ing by internal air pressure. The fab r ic itself carries the
structural load. Only relatively short spans are possible before
buckling fa i lu re occurs in the th in fabr ic of air-inflated structures.
Air-supported structures, on the other hand, are theoretically capable
of un l im i ted spans because each square foot of fab r ic is supported
directly by air pressure against its under surface. Air-supported
structures are often used to cover tennis courts and stadiums. The
only stress in the fab r ic is the tensile stress, usually low, induced
by the slight excess of air pressure needed to keep the fabric taut.
Air-supported structures pose a un ique foundation problem: each
must be held down to the ground by a total force equal to the
product of its internal air pressure and its ground area.

Lateral Support

So far we have discussed only the basic devices for supporting
vertical loads and for supporting loads over horizontal spans. In
order to support the loads generated by even a simple bu i ld ing,
a number of such structural devices must be combined into a frame
to support the surfaces of the building, gather these surface loads,
conduct them to columns or bearing walls, and then carry these
vertical loads to the earth, to which they will be transferred by a
system of foundations. In addition, we must provide devices to
ma in ta in the entire structure in a vertical position against the lateral
forces of w ind, earthquake, and compressive buck l ing that would
otherwise topple it.
We can provide lateral support in three ways (17.71). One is to
make the jo in ts between columns and beams very rigid. This is
easily and economically done in concrete bu i ld ing frames. In steel
f rames it is a little ha rde r, usually requiring that the connections be
welded. In wood frames, rigid joints are very hard to make because
of the d i f f icu l ty of making secure fastenings near the ends of pieces
of wood.
A second way of providing lateral support is to insert diagonal
bracing in various planes in the frame of the building, effectively
creating vertical trusses. A third method, akin to diagonal bracing, is
to use shear panels of steel, plywood, or concrete instead of braces.
Both diagonal bracing and shear panels are easily constructed in any
common f ram ing material. Masonry walls can also be good shear
panels, especially if they are reinforced with steel bars.
With any of the three methods of providing lateral support, the
support devices (rigid joints, diagonal bracing, or shear panels) must
operate in two mutually perpendicular vertical planes, such as the

199

17.71

17.72

north-south and east-west directions of the building. They must be
arranged, as seen from above, in a more-or-less symmetrical fashion
about the centroid of the bu i ld ing.
The floor and roof planes of a bu i ld ing also play a role in its lat-
eral stability. They act as very deep horizontal beams that transmit
wind forces from the exterior walls of the building to the vertical
planes of lateral support (17.72). Lateral loads on buildings must be
carefully computed and devices of suff ic ient strength provided to
resist them, just as vertical loads are computed and resisted with the
greatest of care.

Collapse of Building Frames

Recent terrorist attacks have caused the collapse of such ma jor build-
ings as a federal office bu i ld ing in Oklahoma City and the World
Trade Center Towers in Manhattan. In both of these cases, massive
explosions blew away considerable portions of the loadbearing struc-
ture. In Oklahoma City, numerous ad jacent bays of columns and
beams were demolished by the blast. In the Trade Center Towers,
the airplanes that were purposely flown into the towers cut through
perhaps one-third of the vertical supports for the floors above the
points of attack. In both cases, collapse of at least a ma jor portion of
the bu i ld ing was inevitable. Bu i ld ing frames can be designed to
survive an accident or attack that removes a column here or there by
strengthening the beams and girders so that they can take over and
share the load from the missing member and remain standing. But
it is almost impossible to design a building to remain standing when
a ma jor portion of its structure is no longer doing its job.
Much has been made of the supposed weakness of the f ram ing
system and fireproofing of fram ing members in the World Trade
Center Towers. In fact, the ability of both towers to remain standing
with a th ird of their columns having been cut was a tribute to the
work of the ir structural engineers. What brought the towers down
was not the cutting of so many structural members, but the
prolonged, very hot fire that was fed by the full fuel tanks of the air-
planes. The fireproofing on steel fram ing members is not designed
to protect them against so hot a fire (chapter 19 of this book will be
helpful in unders tand ing how heat affects steel fram ing members).
When the floor structure just above the fire in each tower eventually
grew hot enough to collapse, the heat-weakened beams and slabs
fell to the floor just beneath. This overloaded the already weakened
floor so that it collapsed, sending two floors of structure onto the
floor below. This process repeated itself floor by floor all the way to
the ground, with the load accumu la t ing floor by floor as the collapse
approached the ground. The lowest floors were crumpled by the

200

force of a hundred stories of collapsed building that fell on them
simultaneously.

Foundations
Where the columns or bearing walls of a building meet the ground,
the vertical and horizontal loads of the bu i ld ing must be transmitted
safely into the earth. In order to do this, some sort of transitional
device usually is required. A steel column carries its load at a stress
of some hundreds of tons per square foot (tens of megapascals). No
soil or rock is capable of carrying such an intense pressure, and if
the column were allowed to rest directly on the ground, it would
penetrate into it immediately and uncontrollably, carrying a portion
of the building with it. If a steel column carries its load at a stress
of 500 tons per square foot (47.88 MPa) and it must rest on soil that
can carry safely only 10 tons per square foot (0.958 MPa), we must
insert between the column and the soil a block that is

times as large in the horizontal plane as the cross-section of the
column. If the column is one-quarter square foot (0.023 m2) in cross-
sectional area, the block must be 50 times one-quarter, or 12.5 square
feet in area (50 x 0.023 m2 = 1.15 m2). A block of concrete just
over 3.5 feet square (1.07 m x 1.07 m) has an area of 12.5 square feet
and will do the job (17.73). This block is called a spread footing.
Interestingly, this example requires a second sort of spread footing
as well, because the concrete, although it is much stronger than the
soil, is also incapable of directly sustaining the intense pressure of
the steel column. A heavy steel base plate must be inserted between
the column and the concrete footing to spread the load. The size
of the base plate is computed in the same general manner as is the
size of the footing itself.
A spread footing can be either an isolated footing, as in the pre-
ceding example, or a continuous strip footing, in which it is used to
support a concrete or masonry wall (17.74). A wall can be supported
on isolated footings instead of a continuous strip footing if a grade
beam is provided to conduct the wall load to the footings. In soils of
intermediate to low bearing capacity, isolated spread footings may
be so large that it is easier and more economical to pour a single
continuous reinforced-concrete mat foundation under the entire
bu i ld ing than to construct the individual footings with only small
spaces between them.
Sometimes a firm stratum of soil or rock lies beneath a consider-
able depth of soft soil that is incapable of supporting a building on

17.73

201

17.74

17.75

17.76

spread footings. In this case, it often is possible to bore a hole down
through the soft soil to reach the firm soil, to flare out the hole just
above the firm stratum to give a larger bear ing area, and to fill the
entire hole with concrete. A co lumn or grade beam is then con-
structed on top of this concrete caisson, wh ich transfers its load
down past the soft soil and into the firm soil beneath (17.75). An
alternative possibility is to use a pile driver, wh ich is a very large,
heavy h amm er powered by steam or diesel, to pound a length of
steel or precast concrete vertically through the soft soil un t il its lower
end rests solidly on the ha rd stratum. This founda t ion device is
known as an end-bearing pile.
If firm soil or rock is not w i th in reach of caissons or end-bearing
piles, as, for example, in many filled swamplands or waterfront
areas, friction piles are commonly employed. These are long pieces
of wood, steel, or precast concrete that are pounded endwise into
the soft soil like giant nails. Pound ing continues un t il the fr ic t ion of
the soil against the sides of the pile creates enough resistance that
the pile can sustain a substantial load. Piles are usua l ly driven in
clusters, with a concrete cap over the top of the cluster to d is tr ibu te
the column load among the individual piles. If a column brings a
load of 250 tons (227,000 kg) to earth and each pile can safely sup-
port 10 tons (9,070 kg), a cluster of 25 piles will be needed, arranged
in five rows of five piles each.
Sometimes a bu i ld ing must be bu i lt on soft, weak soil that is
likely to compress and settle under the weight of the bu i ld ing. It
can be advantageous in this situation to support the bu i ld ing on
a floating foundation, also called a compensated foundation, 
in
which the weight of the bu i ld ing is the same as the weight of soil
removed du r ing excavation. One story of excavated soil weighs
about the same as five to eight stories of bu i ld ing. Thus, for example,
a ten- to sixteen-story bu i ld ing can "float" on a two-story basement.
The stress on the soil beneath the bu i ld ing is about the same after
the bu i ld ing is bu i lt as it was before, wh ich tends to m in im ize
settlement (17.76).
Sometimes a founda t ion must be designed to resist an upward
force ra ther than a downward one, especially for the ancho r ing
of air-supported or suspension structures. If suitable rock is w i th in
reach, holes can be drilled into the rock, and cables or rods
cemented into the holes with suitable adhesives. In softer soils, a
simple, workable founda t ion can be created by bury ing a large piece
of concrete. The piece should be large enough that the weight of the
concrete plus the weight of the soil above it total more than the
expected up l i f t. For temporary structures, heavy con ta iners of sand
or water may be placed on the surface of the ground as anchors, or
small metal screw-anchors or stakes can be driven in to the soil.

202

Further Reading

Rowland Mainstone. Developments in Structural Form. Cambridge, Mass., M.I.T.
Press, 1975.

Fuller Moore. Understanding Structures. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1999.

Mario Salvadori. Why Buildings Stand Up. New York, Norton, 1980.

Waclaw Zalewski and Edward Allen. Shaping Structures: Statics. New York, Wiley,
1998.

203

18

Providing? ror Buildingf
Movement

A building, even a seemingly solid, massive one, is never at rest. Its
motions are usually very small ones that we can't see, but most of
them are caused by virtually irresistible forces and would tear the
bu i ld ing to pieces if not provided for in some way. The surfaces of
the building would crack, twist, and tear; components would pull
apart or be crushed together. At best, the bu i ld ing would become
merely unsightly. At worst, it would become leaky and structurally
unsound.
A bu i ld ing starts to move as soon as the first materials are put in
place in the early stages of construction. The soil settles progres-
sively under the foundations as the weight of the building grows.
Most materials that are put in place we t—concre te, mortar, terrazzo,
s tucco—sh r ink slightly and tend to crack as they harden, whereas
gypsum plaster expands slightly and pushes against ad jo in ing
materials. Lumber that is not suff ic ien t ly dry shrinks after installa-
tion. Beams, columns, and other structural elements, regardless of
the material of which they are made, sag or shorten gradually as their
superimposed loads accumulate du r ing construction. Further sag-
ging, variable in magnitude, occurs throughout the life of the build-
ing as live loads on the structure change. In some structural materials,
most notably wood and concrete, a long-term, irreversible sagging
process known as creep takes place over a period of years. Wind and
seismic forces cause small lateral shifts in the frame of the building.
Repeated cycles of movements caused by thermal and moisture
effects occur constantly. A bu i ld ing grows measurably larger in
warm weather and smaller in cold weather. A roof, heated by the
sun, grows larger in the middle of the day while the cooler walls
below stay the same size. At night, the roof cools and shrinks. In
subfreezing temperatures, the formation of ice from water within or

204

beneath a building can crack materials or l ift foundations by its
expansion. Under hum id conditions, wood and wood products
expand, often quite noticeably, and when the air dries out, as in a
heated building in winter, they contract and sometimes crack.
Wood fu rn i tu re that is inadequately glued occasionally pulls apart at
the joints dur ing the peak of the heating season. Wooden doors
and windows sometimes stick immovably in their frames in humid
weather but fit too loosely under dry conditions. Where building
components of d ifferent materials are juxtaposed, they are likely
to move quite differently from one another. An a lum inum window
frame grows significantly smaller in cold weather, but the wood
building frame in which it is mounted is little affected by temper-
ature differences. A prolonged damp spell, however, expands the
wood frame while leaving the a lum inum window unchanged.
Certain unwanted chemical reactions can also cause buildings to
move. As a metal corrodes, it also expands. Lime mortar or plaster
that has not been fully hydrated before application will later expand
as it incorporates moisture from the air into its crystalline structure.
Portland cement reacts chemically with some minerals that may be
inadvertently mixed with it when making concrete, causing destruc-
tive expansion. The jamm ing together of metal components by
corrosion is quite common. These conditions can be remedied only
by carefully controlling the quality of the materials used dur ing
construction and by completely protecting corrosion-prone metals
with appropriate coatings.

Control Joints and Expansion Joints

To accommodate the inevitable movements of a building without
destructive results, designers take precautionary steps during the
design process and throughout construction. The basic principle
they follow is to provide the building and its components with
the space and the means to move without causing damage. The
regularly spaced transverse cracks in an ordinary concrete sidewalk
are a good example of this strategy (18.1). They were created at the
time the concrete was laid to form intentional lines of structural
weakness, in the knowledge that the concrete will shrink as it hardens
and that the sidewalk will further shrink and expand as temperatures
change and be heaved up here and there by frost or tree roots. If the
cracks were not provided, these forces would form their own cracks
in the sidewalk in a thousand d ifferent directions. The intentionally
provided cracks, called control joints, absorb these forces in an
orderly pattern and allow a certain amount of tilting and heaving to
take place without breaking the individual rectangles of concrete.
Control joints are also provided at about 2ofoot (6-m) intervals in

205

18.1

concrete floor slabs that lie on the ground and in most concrete
walls within buildings. They may be made with a special grooving
trowel while the concrete is still wet, or, for a neater appearance, cut
with an abrasive-bladed power saw after the concrete has begun
to harden. Half the steel re inforc ing bars in the wall or paving are
interrupted at each control jo int to create a line of weakness that
encourages cracks to form there rather than elsewhere (18.2).
Concrete block walls have a tendency to shr ink and crack as they
cure and give off water. They need control joints at intervals of 20 to
40 feet (6 to 12 m), depend ing on the moisture content of the blocks
at the time they are put in place (18.3). Exterior stucco walls also are
prone to shrinkage, and control joints are recommended at spacings
of about 10 feet (3 m) to control cracking.
Interior wall and ceiling surfaces usua l ly do not need control
jo in ts because they are made of e i ther plaster or wallboard, both of
wh ich are made p r ima r i ly of gypsum. Gypsum expands slightly as
it hardens, ra ther than shr ink ing. But the expansion of plaster can
cause compression cracking, and large plaster surfaces can also
crack because of movement in the unde r ly ing s truc ture. Thus long

18.2

18.3

206

plaster walls and large ceilings should be subdivided every 30 feet
(9 m) or so with expansion joints. In a typical expansion jo int detail
for plaster, the metal lath (rhymes with "math"—the metal mesh
to which the plaster is applied) is discontinued at the line of the
expansion jo in t, thereby creating a line of weakness that encourages
movement in the wall along that line and not elsewhere. The
flexible metal "bellows" strip gives a neat appearance to the jo int
and keeps the ad jo in ing plaster surfaces aligned despite whatever
movement may occur (18.4).
Another material that tends to expand slightly in a building
is brickwork. Bricks are completely dry when they leave the kiln in
which they are manufactured. In subsequent months and years they
absorb small amounts of moisture and expand slightly. Expansion
jo in ts are recommended at max imum intervals of 200 feet (60 m) in
brick walls (18.5). A hard rubber spline in the core of the wall locks
the sections of wall together. Exterior a lum inum walls of buildings
also need to have expansion joints to allow the metal components to
expand as they are heated by the sun.
Wherever two materials with different movement characteristics
come together in a bu i ld ing or wherever old and new construc-
tion come together in a remodeled project, it is wise to provide an
abutment joint. A wood partition expands and contracts by relatively
large amounts with changes in humidity, whereas a brick wall moves
very little. Where they ad jo in, a broad abutment jo int filled with
synthetic rubber sealant allows the two to move independently (18.6).
Other typical locations for abutment joints are where a plaster wall
abuts a stone fireplace, a wooden window f rame abuts a concrete
column, or the brick wall of a new addition meets the brick wall of
the original building.

18.6

207

18.4

18.5

Structure-Enclosure Joints

Most large buildings today are not supported by the ir walls; quite the
opposite is the case. That is, the interior and exterior walls of a build-
ing are supported by its structural frame. A typical large building
is enclosed with curtain wall panels, and its interior is subdivided
with nonloadbearing partitions. Neither the cur ta in wall panels nor
the partitions are strong enough to support the load of the building 's
floors and roof, so it is important to provide structure-enclosure joints
that ensure that the frame of the bu i ld ing and its walls can move
independently of one another. A typical curtain wall panel is rigidly
attached to the frame of the bu i ld ing at the bottom but is flexibly
attached at the top by means of a flexing or sliding connection
(18.7). This allows the floor beams of the bu i ld ing to deflect without
applying any force to the panel. Inside the building, the tops of
partitions are constructed with a slip jo int in the wall f ram ing and
flexible sealant joints at the top edges of the wall surfaces (18.8).
These allow the floor above to sag under load without applying any
force to the top of the partition.

18.7

18.8

208

18.9

Building Separation Joints

A building that is long or broad is not able to respond as a un it to
foundation settlement, seismic distress, and thermal expansion and
contraction because the accumulation of such forces becomes too
great over the long dimensions of the building, resulting in destruc-
tive cracking and tearing. Thus a large building needs to be divided
into smaller buildings, each of which can act as a compact, rigid
un it in response to such movements. These divisions are best made
at junctions between low and high portions of a building, junctions
between wings, abrupt changes in direction, and other locations that
constitute planes of geometric weakness (18.9). At each such plane,
the structural frame of the building is interrupted completely so as
to create a structurally independent building, with its own columns
and foundations, on each side of the plane. The two buildings
are separated by a gap of several inches to allow plenty of room for
movement. The gap is closed by jo int covers that are designed to
allow the roof, walls, and floors to function normally despite any
movement that may occur (18.10). At the roof, a rubber bellows
keeps water out. At the walls and floors, metal plates and rubber
gaskets are combined to create smooth, attractive surfaces that can
ad just to movement without damage. These joints are commonly
but imprecisely referred to as expansion joints. The term building
separation joint is more descriptive, indicating that the bu i ld ing has
been separated into independent parts along the plane of the jo in t.
One part can settle without affecting the other, and roof and wall

209

18.10

surfaces are free to expand and contract w i thout ha rm in response to
changing weather conditions.

Providing for Movement in Wood

Of those materials that are susceptible to moisture-induced move-
ment, wood is the extreme example. The situation is complicated by
the large difference between movement parallel to the grain of the
wood, wh ich is slight, and movement pe rpend icu lar to the grain,
which is quite considerable (18.11). The problem can be reduced by
using lumber whose moisture content, through careful seasoning,
has been brought to equ i l ib r ium with air of average hum id i ty and
by protecting the finished construction from extremes of moisture
or dry heat. Care must then be taken to m in im ize the rema in ing
effects of cross-grain movement.
Each horizontal wood siding board is nailed onto a house with a
single row of nails located near its lower edge. Its upper edge is held
loosely by the lower edge of the board above. This leaves each board
free to expand and contract across its width as it gains and loses
moisture (18.12).

18.11

18.12

210

In primitive circumstances, wooden doors are often made of
vertical boards fastened together side by side. The widths of these
doors change so much with changes in moisture content that they
often j am in their frames dur ing the hum id summer months but
rattle loosely dur ing the dry winter. The traditional paneled wood
door evolved directly in response to this problem. The panels are
slip jointed into the stiles and rails to allow for internal movement.
Moisture-induced changes in the width of the door are limited to
the sum of the changes in the widths of the two outside stiles, which
total only about a third as much as the width change in a door made
up entirely of vertical boards (18.13).
The floor structure of an ordinary wood-frame house, in which
the wood grain runs horizontally, shrinks by a half-inch or so (about
13 mm) in height as the wood f ram ing dries out dur ing the first
heating season. However, the walls of the house change height very
little between one floor and the next because most of the height of
a wall is made up of lumber whose grain runs vertically. Thus it is
important when f ram ing a house, especially one that has unusual
spaces and forms, to put walls and floors together in a way that main-
tains the same amount of horizontal-grain wood from one side of the

18.13

211

18.14

house to the other at each story (18.14). If this is not done, floors will
slope and plaster will crack because of the d i f fe rent amounts of
vertical shrinkage between one area of the house and another.
Where plywood exterior wall sheathing passes over the edge of a
floor structure, it is wise to leave a horizontal gap of about half an
inch (13 mm) in the plywood to allow the floor to shr ink. On the
in ter ior of a house, plaster does not usually pass vertically over the
edge of a floor structure, but if it does, it should be interrupted with
a horizontal control jo in t.

Further Reading

Edward Allen. Architectural Detailing: Function, Constructibility, Aesthetics. New
York, Wiley, 1993, pp. 75~94-

212

19

Controlling Fire

Uncontrolled fire in a building is a un ique ly deadly and destructive
occurrence:

• A bu i ld ing supplies a concentration of fuel for an accidental
fire. A wooden bu i ld ing is itself a source of fue l, but even a con-
crete or steel building usually contains fu rn i tu re, paper, carpets,
and combustible bu i ld ing materials such as wood paneling and
plastic insulating materials. Oil, gas, gasoline, paints, rubber,
chemicals, and other highly flammable materials are often
present in buildings.
• A bu i ld ing supplies many potential sources of ignition for
accidental fires. Defective furnaces, spark-throwing fireplaces,
leaky chimneys, unattended stoves, loose electrical connec-
tions, overloaded electrical wiring, and carelessly handled
matches and cigarettes are but a few of the means by which a
building or its contents may be set on fire.
• A bu i ld ing, stovelike, contains a fire and encourages its growth
by concentrating its heat and flammable combustion gases.
Where vertical passages through the bu i ld ing are open to the
fire, strong convective drafts fan the flames. Hot gases rise and
set new fires in the upper reaches of the structure.
• A building holds dense concentrations of people, subjects them
to the heat and gases generated by a fire, and restricts their
escape (19.1). If a campfire gets out of control in a wilderness,
few people are likely to be present, and there are a multitude of
directions in which to escape. But if a fire of similar magnitude
starts in a school, a theater, a department store, or an office
building, thousands of people are endangered, and only a few
escape routes are available.

213

19.1

A bu i ld ing serves as a barrier to firefighters. Whereas a wilder-
ness fire can be fought from all sides and even from the air,
a fire in a tall bu i ld ing may be 40 stories above the street,
accessible only by stairway. Low, very broad buildings can put
an interior fire beyond the reach of fire hoses. Bu i ld ing fires
expose firefighters to excessive heat, poisonous gases, explo-
sions, dangerous heights, toppling walls, and collapsing floors
and roofs.

These diverse interactions of buildings and fire take a terrible toll.
Twelve thousand American lives are lost in bu i ld ing fires each year,
and 300,000 people are i n j u r e d, often very seriously and pa infu l ly.
Property losses due to building fires in the United States are mea-
sured in billions of dollars.
Fire begins when a supply of fuel and a supply of oxygen are
brought together at a suff ic ien t ly high temperature to initiate
combustion. As the fire burns, it consumes the fuel and oxygen, and
gives off various gases, particulate emissions, and large quantities
of heat. Depending on the available fue l, the combustion gases may
include carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide,
hydrogen sulfide, and su l fur dioxide. Any of these is toxic if inhaled
in sufficient concentrations.
People may be i n j u r ed by fire in several ways. They may be
burned, particularly in the lungs and respiratory passages, by
exposure to hot air or on the skin by severe thermal radiation. They
may be suffocated by oxygen-depleted air or poisoned by toxic com-
bustion gases. Panic often contributes to loss of life in bu i ld ing fires;
people may make irrational decisions with regard to personal safety
(such as runn ing back into a bu rn ing bu i ld ing to save personal
effects), and they may in ju re one another by pushing, crowding,
or trampling as they rush to escape. The most prevalent cause of
death in bu i ld ing fires is suffocation or carbon monoxide poisoning
that overtakes the victim after he or she has failed to find a means of
escape because of a dense accumulation of smoke.
In designing against fire in buildings, our first aim is to reduce
the risk of human i n j u ry or death to as low a level as possible.
Simultaneously, we wish to m in im ize fire damage to the bu i ld ing
and its contents and to prevent the fire from spreading to neighbor-
ing buildings. We would like, of course, to eliminate all risk of fire,
but contrary to popular myth, there can never be such a thing as a
"fireproof" building. Steel obviously does not bu rn, but it does lose
most of its structural strength and sag or collapse at a temperature
that is well below its own melting point and the sustained tempera-
tures frequen t ly reached by ordinary bu i ld ing fires (19.2). Concrete
is more resistant to fire than steel is, but the crystalline structure of

214

19.2

its cement binder progressively disintegrates when exposed to fire,
and if the fire lasts long enough, serious structural damage will
result. Brick and tile, which are products of intense heat in the kiln,
are not themselves weakened by fire, but their mortar joints are
subject to disintegration, thereby weakening the entire masonry
construction. For reasons such as these, our buildings cannot be
made perfectly resistant to fire. Nevertheless, we have developed a
rather effective and rapidly improving arsenal of weapons to protect
life and property against building fires.

Keeping Fire from Starting

A natural first step in the fire protection of buildings and their
occupants is to prevent fires from starting. Building codes and zoning
ordinances regulate the combustibility of the materials with which
buildings may be built in d ifferent areas of a city, as well as the con-
ditions under which flammable and explosive substances may be
stored in or near buildings. Proper building maintenance ensures
that rubbish does not pile up anywhere. Firefighters and fire under-
writers (insurers) inspect buildings periodically to find whether any
unsafe concentrations of combustible materials have accumulated
in them. Through these same means—codes, zoning ordinances,
maintenance, and inspection—potential sources of accidental igni-
tion are eliminated. Heating devices, chimneys, electrical systems,
electrical devices, and hazardous industrial processes are especially
stringently controlled. Smoking is prohibited by law in gasoline
stations, certain types of industrial plants, auditoriums, and many
public buildings.
Lightning can damage and set fire to buildings in exposed loca-
tions. A lightning bolt is the instantaneous release of a very high
electrical potential between a rain cloud and the earth. Pointed
metal rods connected directly to the earth through heavy, highly
conductive cables furn ish lightning protection for buildings (19.3).
By leaking an electric charge from the ground off their points, the
rods are often able to neutralize the electrical charges of clouds
before lightning bolts form. If lightning strikes the building, the rods
and conductors offer a path to the ground of considerably less resis-
tance than the building itself. Thus they attract the lightning away
from the fabric of the building and conduct it safely to the ground.

Keeping Fire from Spreading

Compartmentation of a building is designed to prevent the spread of
fire, smoke, and heat beyond a restricted area should a fire break
out. In a house, a fire-resistant plaster wall and a solid wood door are

215

19.3

19.4

19.5

required between an attached garage (where gasoline leaks pose a
potential fire hazard) and the dwelling. In rowhouses, fire-resistant
walls must be provided between dwellings (19.4).
In larger buildings, compartmentation becomes increasingly
important, both to protect the larger numbers of people inside and
to prevent the unchecked spread of fire by hot combustion gases.
Stairways and corridors used as escape routes must be isolated
from the rest of the bu i ld ing by fire-resistant walls (usually made of
masonry, plaster, or concrete) and self-closing fire-resistant doors
(usually composed of steel facings with an incombustible m ineral
core) (19.5). Fire-resistant walls and doors also are requ ired as separa-
tions between d i f fe rent types of func t ions taking place in the same
bu i ld ing. A boiler room, for example, must be separated in this man-
ner from the rest of a bu i ld ing so as to contain any fire that might
start there and prevent it from spreading. A woodworking shop or dry
cleaning establishment, either of which contains highly flammable
substances, must be separated from the rema inder of a bu i ld ing that
it shares with other functions.
Open vertical shafts of any kind, whether for stairs, elevators,
ductwork, electrical wiring, or piping, must be enclosed with fire-
resistant walls and self-closing fire-resistant doors at each floor to
prevent the convection of fire and combustion products through the
bu i ld ing (19.6). The only exceptions to this rule are vertical atriums.
Bu i ld ing codes de f ine an a tr ium as a roofed, inhabited, multistory
open space contained w i th in a bu i ld ing. Atriums are commonly
used in shopping arcades, hotels, and office buildings. To avoid the
spread of fire through these vertical spaces, designers must comply
with a number of bu i ld ing code provisions: The balconies around
an a tr ium may be open to it, but su r round ing rooms must be isolated

216

from the balconies and a tr ium by fire-resistant walls. An exception is
made to this enclosure requ irement for any three floors of the build-
ing that the designer may choose, allowing lobby spaces on several
floors to be continuous with the a tr ium. The entire bu i ld ing that
contains the a tr ium and the a tr ium itself must be protected by sprin-
klers. And the a t r ium must be provided with a system of fans that
will operate automatically in case of fire to bring fresh air into the
space at ground level and exhaust smoke at the ceiling level.
Buildings with large floor areas must be subdivided into smaller
areas by means of fire-resistant walls and doors. In large, single-story
factories or warehouses where this is not practical, incombustible
curtain boards must be hung from the roof to catch and contain the
rising hot gases from a fire. A self-opening roof vent must be provided
in each compartment thus formed to allow the hot gases to escape
before they can spread the fire (19.7). The roof vent doors are held
closed against springs by a fusible link of a special low-melting-point
metal that releases them to open in case of a bu i ldup of heat.
In theaters, where the backstage area is often filled with com-
bustible scenery and temporary electrical wiring, the aud ience must
be protected by a fire-resistant cur ta in that is normally rolled up
above the proscen ium. If a fire breaks out, a fusible link melts and
allows the curtain to drop, sealing off the stage from the audience.
A large self-opening vent in the roof of the fly loft above the stage
relieves the heat and smoke in the backstage area (19.8).
Fire-resistant walls are required on the exteriors of many buildings.
The type of materials allowed in these walls and the permissible
extent and treatment of windows and doors are governed by the
proximity of each wall to the walls of neighboring buildings. If
two buildings are w i th in a certain m in imum distance, each must
have a parapet, a fire-resistant wall that projects a distance above
the roof in order to prevent fire from leaping from one roof to the
next (19.9).
The fire-resistive qualities of roof materials are also regulated
by law in urban areas to prevent easy ignition of a roof by bu rn ing
fragments thrown by a fire in an ad jacent building. Wired glass,

19.7

217

19.6

19.8

19.9

which holds together against flame for a considerable period of
time, is usually required in windows that face a nearby structure.
Several substitutes for wired glass have become available in recent
years, inc lud ing a fire-resistant transparent ceramic that stays
intact at high temperatures. In multistory buildings, fire on a lower
floor can spread to upper floors by crawling up the face of the
building floor by floor, breaking windows and igniting combustible
materials inside. Two alternatives are open to the designer to solve
this problem: a fire-resistant spandrel at least 3 feet (914 mm) high
may be provided or else a horizontally projecting flame barr ier,
also made of fire-resistant materials, at least 30 inches (762 mm)
wide (19.10).

19.10

218

Extinguishing Incipient Fires

Rapidly quench ing a small fire before it can grow large is an effec-
tive way of preventing its spread. Such "first-aid" devices as portable
extinguishers and fixed hose reels that can be used by building
occupants help put out many small building fires before they can
spread. Building codes require that these devices be provided and
clearly identified (19.11). More reliable and effective are automatic
sprinkler systems, in which each sprinkler head is controlled by a
plug or link of fusible metal that melts at a temperature of about
i5o°F (65°C) (19.12,19.13). So eff ic ient is the resulting spray of water
in extinguishing a fire that rarely do more than one or two sprinkler
heads open before the fire is put out. Sprinkler systems are costly to
install, but the initial expense is often balanced by cost savings that
accrue to the bu i ld ing owner because of the presence of sprinklers.
Building codes commonly allow several important concessions to
a sprinklered building:

• Greater distances between exits are permitted in sprinklered
buildings, which may have the effect of eliminating one or
more exit stairways from a large building.
• Larger floor areas are permitted between fire separations in
sprinklered buildings, which may result in the elimination of
some fire-resistant walls and doors.
• Larger overall bu i ld ing areas and greater overall heights are
permitted for sprinklered buildings.
• A lesser degree of fire protection may be permitted on some
structural elements of a sprinklered building.
• Larger amounts of combustible building materials may be
incorporated into a sprinklered building.

In addition to these code concessions, fire insurance rates are much
lower for sprinklered buildings than for nonsprinklered ones. Most
fire underwriters refuse to insure a high-hazard building that has no
sprinkler system.
For the occasional building in which sprinkler water would cause
irreparable damage to the building con ten ts—a library, a museum,
an art gallery—analogous but more expensive systems are available
that discharge inert gases or powders onto the flames. Nonwater
systems also are useful in areas such as commercial kitchens where
grease fires or other types of fires that cannot be extinguished by
water may break out.

219

19.11

19.12

19.13

Protecting Human Lives

The most important func t ion that we ask of a bu i ld ing in case of fire
is that it let people reach safety quickly. An alarm system must alert
them immed ia te ly to the presence of fire. Manua l ly operated alarm
boxes must be provided and identified by signs at f requent intervals
in a bu i ld ing. Automatic alarm systems, which sense smoke, heat,
flame, or the ionization products of combustion, are becoming
increasingly common. They are requ ired by law in dwellings to
combat the high percentage of fire deaths that occur while people
are asleep. In some cases, besides setting off warn ing devices in a
building, a larm systems are connected directly to fire depar tment
switchboards to avoid delay in summon ing help.
When a fire breaks out, rapid, well-protected escape on foot to the
outdoors is the best life-saving strategy for able-bodied people. In any

220

19.14

building, a person emerging from a room must have two escape
routes available in two d ifferent directions, so that if one route is
involved in fire, the other may still be used (19.14). A max imum per-
missible distance from the door of any room to the farthest protected
exit is specified; it is usually 150 to 200 feet (40 m to 60 m). Illumi-
nated exit signs must iden t ify these routes, and these signs, together
with sufficient emergency lights to illuminate the corridors and
stairs, must be connected to a battery system that will energize them
automatically if the building 's regular lighting system fails (19.15).
The corridors and stairs of each escape route must be protected from
fire and smoke by fire-resistant partitions and self-closing doors.
(The fam i l iar outdoor iron fire escape that we see in older districts
of cities is no longer legal in new buildings.) The doors along an
escape route may not lock against persons exiting from the bu i ld ing,
and they all must open in the direction of travel from indoors to
outdoors, to prevent possible interference with the flow of escapees.
Exit doors in buildings that hold large numbers of people, par-
ticularly schools, theaters, and athletic assembly buildings, must
be provided with panic hardware that opens the door automatically
upon pressure from w i th in. Revolving doors must be made so that
they fold outward and provide two unrestricted exitways if people try
to turn the door in opposite directions at the same time (19.16). Exit
stairs must be comfortably and consistently proportioned to prevent
stumbling, and they may not have excessive numbers of risers
between landings (19.17). Stair landings may not be narrower than
the stairs that lead into them. Stair railings may not have project-
ing ends that might catch clothing. No th ing may be stored in exit
corridors or stairs. The widths of exit corridors, doors, and stairs,
fur thermore, must be determined in accordance with building-code

221

19.15

19.16

19.17

formulas so that they are adequate to allow the unencumbered
escape of the max imum expected population of the bu i ld ing within
a short period of time.
Not all occupants of buildings are able to escape by the means
ju st described. Small children often cannot read exit signs or make
rational decisions about how to escape. Prisoners are not free to
leave their prisons. Bedridden patients in health-care facilities can-
not move on their own. Many disabled people cannot negotiate
stairs. For these persons, areas of refuge must be provided w i th in
many types of buildings. An area of refuge must be ad jacent to a
protected exit stairway, protected from smoke, and provided with
communications devices that permit those taking refuge to summon
firefighters to rescue them. A horizontal exit is often used to provide
an area of refuge; it is simply a fire-resistant wall and doors that sub-
divide a floor of a bu i ld ing into two areas that are, in effect, separate

222

buildings (19.18). Escape from a fire on one side of the wall requires
only horizontal movement through self-closing fire doors to the
other side of the wall. Horizontal exits can provide refuge for very
large building populations in health-care, detention, and educa-
tional buildings. Smaller areas of refuge for the small populations
of disabled people that are normally present in buildings can be
provided by smoke-protected vestibules adjacent to exit stairways
(19.19) or by enlarged landings in the stairways themselves.
These design guidelines for exitways are comprehensive. If they
seem excessive, one need only remember that each was drawn up to
prevent the recurrence of past tragedies.

Protecting the Structure of the Building

Protecting the structural integrity of a building from the effects of
fire is crucial to ma in ta in ing the value of the bu i ld ing and is even
more crucial to protecting its occupants, firefighters, and neigh-
boring buildings. The taller the building is, the more necessary it is
that neither the bu i ld ing nor any piece of it be allowed to fa l l. Even
though we do not possess any "fireproof" materials, we do have
materials sufficiently resistant to fire to help protect the building
structure for substantial periods of time. Among these are fired-clay
products—brick and t i le— that are chemically unaffected by fire;
a variety of mineral fibers that also are unaffected by fire; and con-
crete and plaster, both of which are composed in large part of
hydrated crystals that absorb very large quantities of heat in order to
evaporate their water of crystallization dur ing a fire and thus offer a

19.18

19.19

223

considerable barr ier to fire dur ing their slow disintegration. A more
recent development in structural fire protection is the intumescent
coating, available as either a pa int or a thick trowel-on compound.
When exposed to heat, the coating softens, releasing bubbles of gas
that expand the coating to form an insulating layer over the substrate
material.
When using any of these materials, the idea is to prevent the
structural collapse of a building within the time that a fire will
normally run its course, or at least to delay collapse in low buildings
un t il all occupants have escaped and firefighters have had a reason-
able chance to save the building. Plaster or plasterboard walls and
ceilings give wooden houses roughly a half hour of protection from
collapse. Low indus tr ial and commercial bu i ld ings may be bu i lt
of unprotected steel, in which case they are classified as "non-
combustible." In a hot fire their collapse would be relatively rapid
but un l ike ly to happen before the occupants could get out through
the easy escape routes. "Slow-burning" construction framed with
timbers at least eight inches (200 mm) in m in imum dimension lasts
considerably longer in a fire than does a frame made of unprotected
steel. Building codes therefore recognize heavy timber construction
as a special category that is safer than f ram ing of unprotected steel.
The ends of t imber beams and joists must be fire cut wherever they
enter masonry walls, in order to keep the wall from toppling should
the beams eventually bu rn through (19.20).
Most large bu i ld ings are constructed of either reinforced concrete
or protected steel. The steel reinforcing bars in concrete beams and
columns are bur ied a specified distance within the mass of concrete
so as to be protected by its thermal capacity and natural fire-resistive
properties. In the earliest buildings framed with steel, beams and

19.20

224

19.21

columns were protected by embedding them in solid brick masonry
or by encasing them entirely in poured concrete. These techniques,
though effective, were relatively expensive and added substantially
to the weight and structural cost of a building. Present-day techniques
include encasing steel members in lath and plaster, surrounding
them with multiple layers of gypsum board, spraying lightweight
mineral insulations in cementitious binders onto them, and attach-
ing preformed slabs of mineral insulation to them (19.21,19.22).
Steel beams and columns on the exterior of a bu i ld ing are not
usually exposed to such high temperatures dur ing a fire as those
inside the building. Designers can determine by mathematical
analysis the maximum temperature to which a given exterior steel
member will rise in a fire, and if the temperature is sufficiently low,
no fire protection need be added.
The collapse of the World Trade Center Towers in Manhattan
after a terrorist attack was the result of the inability of fireproofing
materials to protect steel f ram ing members from very prolonged
exposure to the unusua l ly high temperatures of fires fed by jet air-
plane fuel. It would be almost impossible to construct a tall building
to resist such fires. Even if possible, it would not be economical.

Helping Firefighters

It is vital that a building assist and protect firefighters during a blaze.
A building's designers must fu rn ish local fire authorities at the time
of construction with information regarding the configuration and

225

19.22

19.23

19.24

construction of a bu i ld ing, its expected contents and use, and
its facilities for assisting firefighters. Fire departments keep this
informa t ion on file so that it can be consulted at the time a fire
might break out. Complexes of buildings must be planned so that
fire trucks can drive to any building in the complex (19.23). Outdoor
hydrants must be located within easy hose reach of the various
buildings. Buildings must be designed so that fire-truck ladders can
reach lower-floor windows.
One exit stairway in a taller bu i ld ing must be placed in a smoke-
proof enclosure (19.24). This stair either is connected to the main
spaces of the bu i ld ing only by open-air balconies or is automatically
pressurized with fresh air by a fan in case of fire. Within each exit
stairway in multistory buildings, a standpipe must be furn ished to
which fire hoses may be connected at any floor. To ensure a con-
tinuous supply of water through the standpipe, a Y-shaped Siamese
connection must be connected to the pipe at street level. One or two
pumper trucks may couple to this connection to ma in ta in pressure
and volume in the standpipe if the city water mains cannot keep up
with demand dur ing a fire.
Because of the ir inherent unreliability, especially du r ing a build-
ing fire, elevators and escalators generally may not be used as escape
devices in buildings. But specially equipped elevators are required
to assist firefighters in gaining quick access to the upper reaches of
tall buildings. These must comply with elaborate precautions that
ensure reliable smoke control, a secure supply of electricity, and
complete isolation from the effects of the fire.

Further Reading

James Patterson. Simplified Design for Building Fire Safety. New York, Wiley, 1993.

226

20

Gettingf a Building Built

A building begins as a concept of need in someone's mind. If the
need is a simple one and the person dexterous and ambitious, the
steps needed to realize the concept are simple and direct. In some
primitive societies, one or more members of the fam i ly or tribe
scratch a floor-plan circle or rectangle of suitable size on the bare
ground and assemble locally gathered m a t e r i a l s—mud, stone, reeds,
snow, logs, or po le s— in to a bu i ld ing on the spot. The design and
details of the bu i ld ing require little thought because they are
traditional to the society. The suburban American do-it-yourselfer,
whether needing a tool shed or an entire house, generally takes
somewhat more elaborate steps. He or she spends time developing
plans on paper or spends money purchasing ready-made plans in
order to resolve as many functional problems as possible before
starting construction. The paper plans also allow accurate estimating
of the necessary quantities of bu i ld ing materials and labor and
facilitate negotiations with the local building inspector for a permit
to bu i ld. Once everything is in order, materials are bought and
delivered, tools are prepared, and construction can begin.
Residential-scale buildings are sometimes bu i lt by the owner but
usually by a builder, a small construction company that often con-
sists of only three or four workers and builds only one project at a
time. A custom bu i ld ing is one that is planned by an architect or
residential designer for a specific owner and built under a simple
contract or agreement to build. Some builders specialize in spec-
ulative building, erecting buildings that will be sold to a buyer
who is not known at the time construction commences. Speculative
builders may work on a one-at-a-time basis, or they may build dozens
or hundreds of houses at a time on large tracts of land.
Builders often work from stock plans, ones that are purchased
from residential designers for a small fee. The builder, who often

227

works physically on the project, usually builds the frame of the
building and applies the exterior finish materials to the walls. The
builder hires specialist subcontractors to excavate and construct
the foundation, apply the roofing material, install plumbing, heat-
ing, and electrical services, install thermal insulation, apply interior
wall and floor finishes, install cabinetry, and do site and landscaping
work. The builder comes back to apply interior baseboards and tr im,
after which a painting subcontractor finishes the bu i ld ing.

Organizing the Larger Project

For larger bu i ld ing projects, more complex arrangements are neces-
sary. A large number of people and organizations are needed: not
just the owner and local building inspector but also an architect;

20.1

228

various engineers and specialist design consultants in such fields as
structure, foundations, heating, plumbing, electrical work, acous-
tics; a general contractor; subcontractors and materials suppliers;
and a small army of financiers, lawyers, and insurers (20.1). With so
many entities involved, with so much money changing hands, and
with the ever-present hazards of accident, fire, vandalism, inclement
weather, labor disputes, inflation, and materials shortages and delays,
firm, written understandings must be established among the various
entities regarding who is responsible for what, especially if some-
thing should go wrong. As a basis for these understandings, all must
agree precisely on what is to be built and how. The "what" and "how"
are the purposes of the architect's specifications and working drawings.
The specifications are a written document that enumerates in
detail the type and quality of all the materials to be used in a build-
ing, the standards of workmanship to be expected, and which trades
will be responsible for which portions of the work (20.2). The work-
ing drawings (sometimes called the blueprints because long ago
they were printed in white on a blue background) show the size,
location, and configuration of all parts of the building. These are pre-
sented in terms of what each tradesperson needs to know in order to
get the building built in its intended form (20.3). The specifications

20.2

20.3

229

20.4

and working drawings are, for practical purposes, the sole means of
translating the design ideas of the owner and the architect into an
actual bu i ld ing. They serve as the basis for just about everything
that is involved in getting a bu i ld ing built: construction financing,
various insurances, estimating and b idd ing construction costs, the
general construction contract and all subcontracts, material supply
contracts, and the legal permit to build the building. As such, they
must be complete, clear, unambiguous, and understandable (20.4).
They must be written and drawn in a language that is understood
by the people who will provide and place the materials. Beauty is
of no importance in these drawings, but clarity and precision are
essential. Specifications are usua l ly organized according to a stand-
ard fo rmat developed by the Construction Specifications Institute
and Construction Specifications Canada (20.5).
The actual contract for construction is made between the owner
of the bu i ld ing and the general contractor. Most contracts are based
on standard contracts that take into account all the things that can
go wrong with a project. What if the contractor is losing money on a

230

Typical Specification Sections for a Medium-Sized Building. 

20.520.5

construction project and withdraws from it? (The contract provides
that the contractor must post a performance bond before commenc-
ing work. This is a form of insurance that provides cash for the owner
to finish the project with another contractor if the original con-
tractor withdraws.) What if the owner does not pay the contractor for
work completed, in accordance with a schedule of payments spelled
out in the contract? (The contract allows the contractor to stop work
if payments are not made in a timely manner .) Who is responsible
for insuring the bu i ld ing dur ing construction? (The owner.) Who is
responsible for insuring the workers? (The contractor.)

231

Problems of Construction

A building und er construction creates many temporary d isrup t ions,
dislocations, and hazards in its vicinity. The soil and vegetation are
torn up. Roads and sidewalks are often obstructed and na tu ral
surface drainage patterns interrupted. Heavy construction vehicles
often break the pavement accidentally. Construction work generates
noise, dust, and fumes. Power tools and construction mach inery
present hazards to fingers and limbs. Tools and ma ter ia ls may fa ll or
be blown by w ind from h igher levels of the bu i ld ing. Edges of floors
and holes in floors for pipes, wires, ducts, stairs, and elevators create
the risk of acc iden tal falls. The chances of accidental fire are higher
du r ing construction than in the finished building, with debris
accumu la t ing and var ious fue l-burn ing torches and heaters in use.
The partly finished bu i ld ing is attractive to thieves, vandals, and
adven tu re seekers, mak ing it doubly vulnerable to fire and acci-
dent. Therefore the cons truc t ion process itself needs careful design
attention in order to m in im i ze its danger and unpleasantness and
to max im ize its e f f ic iency and economy.
Temporary u t i l i t ies are needed d u r i ng the construction process:
water, electricity for power tools and temporary i l lum ina t ion, tele-
phone lines, temporary toilets, and waste removal services. Con-
struction workers need parking or other transportation arrangements.
The contractor must provide a system of temporary drainage to keep
excavations free of water and to control surface drainage. Precau-
tions must be taken to prevent soil erosion by w ind or water. Nea rby
wetlands, forests, and buildings must be protected from dust and
runo f f. Trucks b r ing ing materials to the site need delivery routes
that will d is rupt t ra f f ic as little as possible and avoid d is tu rb ing resi-
dential areas. An area of the site for un load ing materials is required,
ad jacent to dry, safe areas where materials can be stored un t il
needed. There must be l if t ing and ca r ry ing devices to un load trucks,
stack and unstack materials, l i ft materials and workers to the var ious
levels of the building, and transport materials across each level.
On m any projects, the contractor must erect temporary fences
and barriers of various k inds to protect the public from the hazards
of the work and to protect the work from intruders. Trees must
be fenced and padded against accidental damage by construction
mach ine ry. If excavations are in uns tab le soil or too close to roads or
ad jacent bu i ld ings, they must be shored to prevent collapse of the
su r round ing soil (20.6, 20.7). If the excavation is to go below the
level of the foundations of ad jacent buildings, those bu i ld ings may
have to be supported temporarily against subsidence or s l id ing.
If the level of water in the ground is above the bottom of the excava-
tion, the site must be dewatered to make construction possible.

232

20.6

Dewatering may be as simple as digging a shallow pit in the deepest
part of the excavation and pump ing out any water that accumulates
in it, but often it involves installing well points and a system of
p ip ing and pumps to draw down the level of ground water around
the site (20.8).
As the bu i ld ing rises, workers need scaffolding, ladders, and
hydraulic lifts for access to the various surfaces of the building. In
taller buildings, one or more temporary elevators may be required.
Many structural elements need temporary support: knee braces for
walls, formwork for concrete, centering for masonry arches, and
temporary diagonal braces of plank or cable throughout wood or
steel frames. All these will later be removed as the structure becomes
self-supporting. For safety and convenience, contractors may install
temporary floors of wood planking in steel bu i ld ing frames until the
permanent floors are in place and temporary railings have been
installed at edges and openings of floors.
Temporary protection against the weather is requ ired in several
areas of the bu i ld ing site: The contractor and subcontractors need
one or more portable field offices. Sheds or trailers often store tools
and valuable materials on the site or shelter specific areas of work
such as those around large power saws for cutting wood or masonry.
Waterproof tarpau l ins shelter piles of materials. In severe weather,
tarpaulins act as roofs or walls throughout a bu i ld ing site to shelter
work and workers from w ind, rain, snow, or cold air. In winter,
temporary heating stoves protect concrete or masonry work against
freezing and help paint and plaster to dry. In very hot weather,
sunshading may have to be provided (20.9).

233

20.7

20.7

20.9

Workers on a construction job are exposed to many dangers;
building contracting has one of the highest rates of on-the-job in ju ry
of any industry in the United States. As a result, many protective
devices are required for the various trades. The hard safety helmet
is universal to protect the head against dropped objects or from
bump ing against overhead hazards. Hard-toed safety shoes protect
feet from dropped tools or materials. Nonslip soles serve an obvious
safety function. Goggles of various types protect eyes from the sparks
and glare of welding and keep flying chips and dust from power tools
out of the eyes. Leather gloves, aprons, dust-filtering respirator
masks, and safety belts or safety lines are required for certain trades.
Even the ironworkers who erect structural steel frames wear safety
harnesses that are clipped securely to safety cables strung tightly
between columns, and roofers are secured to roofs with similar
devices. Scaffolding must have guard rails to prevent workers from
falling off. Most power tools have built-in safety features such as
self-returning blade guards, anti-kickback devices, and self-opening
switches to shut off the tool if it is accidentally dropped. First-aid kits
and fire extinguishers are kept close at hand, and instructions about
medical and fire assistance are prominently posted. Medical and
hospitalization insurance for injured workers is required by law. A
safety officer is appointed by the contractor on each construction
site to ensure that all aspects of the work are clean and safe. In the
United States, federal government inspectors check construction
sites to see that contractors comply with the complex provisions of
the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA).
The workers normally own their small construction tools—
hammers, handsaws, and so forth. Larger tools belong to the general
contractor or subcontractors. But if a contractor does not like to keep a
large inventory of construction equipment, he or she may rent or lease
very large or highly specialized tools from an equipment-rental firm.
Every shipment of material that goes into a building must be
checked upon delivery to ensure that it meets the written specifica-
tions. Each piece of lumber or plywood comes from the mill with a
printed identification of its species and grade that makes on-site
inspection easy. Structural steel is delivered with a certificate from
the steel mill of its composition and quality. Most other building
materials are similarly marked or certified with indications of their
origins and quality.
Materials such as concrete and mortar, which are put in place
wet, cannot be thoroughly checked for quality at the time of their
placement, because there is no sure way of knowing what their
strength will be after they have hardened. The standard procedure is
to cast several small samples of material from each batch in special
molds. These samples are carefully marked, recorded in a logbook

235

along with the locations in the bu i ld ing where the corresponding
batch of material was used, and kept on the site for a standard period
of hardening. Then they are transported to a laboratory where their
strength is determined by crush ing them in a calibrated hydraulic
press. If the c rush ing strength is above the specified m in imum value,
all is well. If it is not, work done with the batches of material from
which the samples were taken may have to be taken out and done over.
With the aid of modern measur ing and leveling instruments,
bu i ld ings are bu i lt with a surpr is ing degree of precision, but they are
not like watches or cameras. One must assume that even the best-
produced building componen ts—because of their large size, ship-
ping damage they may have suffered, water they may have absorbed
in transit or on the job site, and variations in t emp e r a tu r e—m ay not
be square, flat, true, p lumb, perfect, or accurate at the time they are
installed in a building. One must also assume that a worker may not
always measure or install a piece exactly as it should be, especially in
the rougher sorts of work such as concrete work and wood f ram ing.
For a few bu i ld ing components, such as structural steel, there is an
industry-wide standard specifying the max imum amoun ts of various
sorts of distortions and inaccuracies that can be expected in the
product when it arrives at the construction site. For most compo-
nents, however, we must assume that dimensional accuracy of plus
or m inus one-quarter inch (6 mm) is reasonable to expect in build-
ings. Discrepancies of an inch or several inches (25 mm or more)
sometimes must be accepted. Under these conditions, joints in
which one piece of material simply laps over another are the easiest
and safest to make (20.10). Where materials must be butted at two or
more sides, it's essential that intentional gaps be provided to allow
for inaccurate positioning and fitting. The openings for window
and door units in wood-frame walls are always larger than the units
themselves. When the un i ts are installed, they are leveled and
located accura te ly by means of small wedges a round the perimeter.
The siding covers the resulting gap on the outside, and the interior
wall finish conceals it on the inside. Concrete or metal exterior wall
panels are installed with intentional gaps between them, typically
one-quarter-inch to i-inch wide (6 to 25 mm ). These are intended
as much for thermal movement and s truc tural deflection as for ease
of installation. The metal mounting clips on such panels provide
generous ad jus tmen ts for accurate leveling and locating before a
pe rmanent attachment is made.
In p lann ing a construction job, it is important that those materi-
als that must present a good, finished appearance be installed as late
in the process as possible and that they be protected from damage until
the last worker is out of the building. In many buildings, for example,
it would be easiest to install the finish flooring early in construction,

236

20.10

dur ing the f ram ing operation. If this were done, however, the surface
would be exposed to the abrasion, chipping, scratching, indentations,
dripping, and spotting caused by the feet, tools, materials, spillage, and
miscellaneous accidents associated with all the subsequent work in
the building. Instead, even at the cost of some inconvenience, install-
ing finish floors is one of the very last jobs to be done in a building.
Designers must consider carefully what is to be left exposed in
a building. It might be attractive to expose the wood f ram ing in
the wall of a house—but what will the wall really look like, with the
irregular member spacings around openings, the na tu ral defects
in the lumber, the grade-marking stamps, the dents left by the car-
penter's hamme r, the leftover pencil marks, and the electrical wiring
and p lumb ing pipes drilled coarsely through? If a wall's f ram ing is to
be seen, it demands close attention to appropriate lumber grades
and careful routing of pipes and wires. It also demands a higher
and more time-consuming quality of workmanship than a fram ing
carpenter is normally asked to do. Usually it is cheaper to follow the
standard procedure of br ing ing in gypsum wallboard workers and
painters to cover the wall in several successively better-finished
layers of work, letting the carpenter, electrician, and p lumber work
in the ir customarily rough and efficient ways.
It is readily apparent when examining any of the traditional ways
of putting buildings together in our society that a principle is gener-
ally followed of sequencing construction so that each of the trades
covers up and smooths over the work of the previous trades. The
fourth-from-last trades to do their work in a typical building install
large areas of flat material—siding, wall panels, lath, gypsum wallboard
— t h at crudely cover the exposed innards of the bu i ld ing. The third-
from-last crews are the smoothers-on of gooey substances—sealants,
plaster, wallboard jo int compound— th at obscure the worst gaps in
the flat materials. The next-to-last crews install flooring, cover plates,
heating and lighting fixtures, cover strips, and moldings of various
sorts. The last crew, the painters, brighten and conceal all these layers
with a thin cosmetic and preservative coating, ready for the final
cleanup of construction debris, the final inspections of all parties
concerned, and the handing of the keys to the owner. The building,
after a long and often-troubled period of gestation, is born at last.

The Cost of Building

Buildings are inherently very expensive objects. Expense can be
measured ultimately in two quantities, the amount of physical
resources consumed and the human time consumed. The physical
resources can be assessed only in relative terms, but with human
time we can be much more precise. The average house in America

237

requires a total of about one-fifteenth of a human 's working lifetime
to produce. An average Manhattan skyscraper uses, in total, the
equivalent of the entire useful lives of 50 to 100 workers in its con-
struction and the equivalent of several lifetimes per year in its main-
tenance. Very large buildings often cost several times this amount.
As to why buildings are so expensive, this is best learned by work-
ing on the construction of a building. Even a small, u t i l i tar ian build-
ing uses copious tonnages, volumes, and areas of costly materials,
most or all of which must be lifted, positioned, and jo ined by human
labor. The number of nails, bricks, or bolts consumed is often
staggering, and each such component involves the expenditure of
a finite and nontrivial amount of human time. The number of sep-
arate operations requ ired to complete even the simplest bu i ld ing
detail is quite surprising. Such necessary activities as managing
workers, ordering materials, th ink ing through problems, p lann ing
the next stages of construction, keeping records, and paying bills
also take up large amounts of time. The totals rise quickly, and one
soon realizes that we have become accustomed to constructing very
large and very expensive shelters.
Once the design of a building has been established, economy in
building construction is a matter of good management. Good man-
agement requires the best and most eff ic ient use of workers, tools,
materials, and money. As much work as possible should be done
under shelter, preferably in a factory, where working conditions are
ideal and there is a high level of mechanization. Workers on the
building site need to be choreographed carefully so that they are
neither standing idle nor getting in one another's way. Materials
need to be obtained at the lowest possible price, but only at the
required level of quality, and only from reputable suppliers. They
should be delivered as needed. If they arrive on the site too late, they
will hold up work. If they arrive too early, they will take up storage
space on the site. They are also more likely to be damaged before
installation by weather or accident, are more subject to pilferage,
and have to be paid for earlier.
A good building contractor treads a tightrope, bidding low
enough to win work in competition with other contractors but high
enough to realize a fa ir profit. A contractor that bids consistently low
will likely end in bankruptcy through losing money on too many
projects. One that bids consistently high will become insolvent by
never w inn ing projects to bu i ld. When a contractor wins a project
at a fa ir price, he or she must manage the pro ject closely and
knowledgeably, both to ma in ta in the expected profit margin and
to produce a well-built bu i ld ing. Construction is a risky and highly
skilled profession. New contracting companies come and go rapidly.
Only responsible, competent contractors survive for very long.

238

21

Keeping? a Buildingf
Alive ana Growing?

Even before a building is completed, Nature begins to destroy it
systematically. Gravity, wind, and seismic movements constantly test
the stability of the structure. The ultraviolet wavelengths of sunlight
fade organic building materials and break down their molecules.
Rainwater dissolves carbon dioxide and su lfur dioxide from the
atmosphere to form weak carbonic and su l fu r ic acids that eat away
at stone and encourage the oxidation of metals. Where two adjacent
metals of dissimilar electrolytic potentials are wetted by rainwater, a
galvanic reaction occurs, generating electric currents that cause
rapid decomposition of the anodic metal. Water encourages the
growth of molds, mildew, and fungi that attack many building ma-
terials, particularly wood and wood products. Water also encourages
several types of wood-destroying insects, as well as weeds, vines, and
trees whose roots burrow into tiny bu i ld ing cracks and wedge them
inexorably larger. Falling water spatters soil onto the lower reaches
of exterior walls, nourishing insects and fungi. As water freezes in
soil, it heaves and cracks foundations and pavings. Freezing water
spalls chips from the surfaces of concrete and masonry. Wind trans-
ports dust, spores, and seeds and deposits them on buildings. Mice
and rats set up residence inside and gnaw passages through a build-
ing. Domestic animals rub, chew, and scratch building surfaces and
deposit decay-breeding excrement in obscure corners. The human
inhabitants of a building do their share to tear it down, too, tracking
in moisture and dirt, spilling, spattering, staining, charring, banging,
scuffing, scratching, breaking, discarding debris, wearing out doors
and drawers, keeping destructive pets, rearing destructive children,
and creating smoke, soot, and cooking fumes that stain building sur-
faces. Nature bears no special grudge against buildings; for the most
part these are the same natural forces that level mountains, divert

239

rivers from their beds, change lakes into meadows and meadows
into forests, and tu rn old materials into new ones 
throughout
the natural world. Change is the constant factor in Na ture. Birth,
growth, maturity, decline, death, decay, and rebirth are the stages in
all natural cycles. So too with buildings, but we humans like to keep
the cycle under human control, to ma in ta in each bu i ld ing in use
until its death suits our purposes.
The forces of deterioration in buildings can be grouped into three
categories: Some forces pose such strong or immediate threats to the
usefulness of the building that they must be neutralized at all cost.
Other forces are inevitable, but we can cope with them satisfactorily
on a day-to-day basis. And paradoxically, certain forces of deteriora-
tion can contribute to the beauty and utility of the b u i l d i n g— if we
will let them.

Safeguarding the Building

Among the first category offerees, the most dangerous are those that
threaten the stability of a building 's foundations. We avoid frost
heaving by found ing the bu i ld ing below the deepest level at which
the soil freezes in winter. We avoid excessive settlement by design-
ing the founda t ions so that they do not exceed the bear ing capacity
of the supporting soil. To prevent erosion of the soil from around
and under foundations, roof-water drainage systems must be kept in
good working order, and any ma jor pipe leaks inside or near the
building must be repaired promptly. In dry, windy locations, plant-
ings or other protective devices must be employed to protect the soil
against wind erosion. Areas immediately ad jacent to basement walls
must be kept clear of trees to avoid root damage. Driven piles made
of untreated wood should be periodically inspected to ensure that
wells or pumps at nearby construction projects have not lowered the
water table below the tops of the piles, for unless the piles are totally
submerged, decay will set in.
If a building's foundations have settled but the building is not
irreparably damaged, underpinning is usually an effective remedy,
in which new foundations of larger capacity are constructed under
or alongside the existing ones, and the bu i ld ing is jacked onto the
new ones.
Structural weaknesses also fall into the "dangerous" category.
Ordinarily a building's structure is strong enough to begin with, but
if fau l ty design or increased loadings cause structural inadequacies
when the building is being used, new beams, columns, or bracing
can be added.
Structures require maintenance. Steel structural members must
be protected from dampness and rust by either the surround ing

240

layers of a building, or by the maintenance of paint or some other
protective coating on all exposed surfaces. Bolted joints in timber
frames need to be retightened to compensate for wood shrinkage
after the building has been heated for an initial period after con-
struction; access holes or access panels must be provided in any
covering materials to allow this. Wood fungi and wood-destroying
insects must be kept out of wooden structures. Some wood fung i,
such as the blue-gray stain found on recently sawed, unseasoned
lumber or the white flecks seen in some woods, are merely unsightly
and cause no structural damage. Others, with colloquial names like
dry rot and wet rot, are exceptionally destructive. Wood-boring and
wood-eating insects, of which there are many species in various parts
of the world, can endanger the stability of a structure.
Most wood-destroying organisms consume wood as food, need
moisture, and need air. The chief means of controlling the organ-
isms are to poison the wood, to keep the wood completely dry to
deprive the organisms of moisture, or to keep the wood completely
submerged in water to deprive them of air. Various chemical sub-
stances called preservatives are used commercially to poison wood
against both insects and fung i. They are not very effective if merely
applied to the surface and should instead be dispersed throughout
the cells of the wood by pressure treatment in a factory. Certain species
of wood are naturally resistant to insects and decay by virtue of
chemical substances that grow naturally in them. Redwood, cypress,
and cedar are the most common American woods with this property.
Keeping wood either dry or wet may seem like contradictory aims,
but wood in either condition is safe from attack. Wood that is moist
but not submerged or wood that is alternately wetted and dried offers
both moisture and air to destructive organisms and is therefore
strongly attacked. Wood that is in or very near to the soil is especially
vulnerable. Wood laid directly on a brick or stone foundation
should be protected from capillary moisture with a damp-proof layer
of impervious plastic or asphalt. Wood beams resting in pockets in
founda t ion walls should have similar protection and should be given
plenty of space to "breathe" on all sides. It is wise to use preservative-
treated wood wherever a wood frame comes in contact with a foun-
dation wall.
Where one piece of wood is connected to another in an exterior
location, rainwater is held between them by capillary action, and
decay is rapid. The covered bridge illustrates one logical response to
this problem: The hundreds of joints in the wood trusses supporting
the bridge are kept dry by a waterproof roof and walls (21.1). If the
bridge were not covered, it would become structurally unsound
within several years because of the decaying of its connections.
Where weather protection of wood connections is not possible,

241

21.1

preservative treatment, or at least a heavy application of paint, stain,
or asphalt, can slow deterioration, but exposed wood connections
should be avoided except in benches, railings, fences, and other
secondary constructions. Even in these, periodic inspection and
maintenance are required to replace rotting components before
they become dangerous.
Termites are especially liable to attack a bu i ld ing that has
untreated wood parts extending into the ground or one with wood
scraps or tree stumps bur ied near the building. Termites are capable
of attacking dry wood, however, by carrying water from the ground
to the wood. The most common (and most damaging) type of ter-
mite found in the United States is the subterranean termite, which
nests in the soil but takes its food from the wood of a building above.
In order to reach the bu i ld ing, the insects build hollow shelter tubes
of mud, wood dust, and excreta over the intervening founda t ion
construction and then tunnel into the wood itself. Where termite
infestations are common, the soil in the immediate vicinity of the
building should be poisoned, and sheet metal termite shields should
be installed between the founda t ion and the wood structure (21.2).
The shields do not prevent the entry of termites, but they do cause
the insects to have to bu i ld the ir shelter tubes over the shield, where
they can be seen, rather than through cracks in the founda t ion. If
tubes are seen on the shields, an exterminator can be called.
Dry wood termites, which need very little moisture, do not
require contact with the soil and are found in wooden buildings in
the tropics and subtropics. Infested buildings must be covered with
plastic sheets and fumigated with poison gas. Other types of termites
and wood-destroying insects are found in various parts of the world,
each requ ir ing its own set of preventions and cures.
Closely associated with decay and termite prevention is the pre-
vention of water leaks in buildings. Aside from fire or earthquake,
nothing can bring down a bu i ld ing faster than the internal decay
caused by a leaky roof. Roofs, rainwater drainage systems, walls,
and windows must be maintained diligently. Plumbing leaks and
conditions of excessive condensation must be attended to quickly.
In the ordinary wood-frame house, water damage and decay from
condensation are common in wooden window sashes across the
bottom of each pane of glass and in wooden subfloors beneath toilet
tanks. Leakage problems and the ir associated water damage and
decay occur frequently next to chimneys and around roof gutters.
Through decay of the roof boards around leaks, such problems
compound rapidly unless taken care of as quickly as they occur.
Roof maintenance includes keeping drainage systems oper-
ational, leakproof, and free of clogging debris, removing soil and
growing plants that may settle in crevices, and inspecting for leaks or

242

21.2

signs of deterioration. Shingles of any sort are gradually eroded by
water, ice, and wind; are decomposed by the destructive powers
of the sun; and may be split or torn by ice, wind, or tree branches.
Membrane roofs erode less rapidly but are susceptible to damage by
expansion and contraction of the roof deck, vapor blistering and
rupture, and abrasion from excessive foot traff ic.
The mortar joints in masonry are vulnerable to damage by the
freezing and thawing of absorbed water. Masons can shape and
compact mortar joints to make them shed water rather than trap it or
absorb it (21.3). Even with such precautions, however, the mortar
deteriorates progressively, usually over a period of many decades,
and from time to time it is necessary to rake out the damaged
mortar near the surface and repoint the masonry with new mortar.
Climbing vines accelerate the deterioration of masonry because
their roots penetrate the surface and their leaves keep it moist
between storms. Bu i ld ing owners must weigh this factor against
the unden iab le charm of climbing vines, their contribution to
summertime cooling through shade and leaf-surface evaporation,
and the ir insulating role in winter.
Continuous inspection is required to maintain a building 's fire
hazards at an acceptable level. Rubbish must be cleared promptly.
Chimneys, appliances, and the loads on electrical circuits must
be checked periodically to ensure safe operating conditions. Exits
must be kept clear. Fire doors must be kept closed but operable.
Misplaced, missing, or deteriorated extinguishers must be replaced,
and alarm and emergency lighting systems must be checked regu-
larly. In certain types of buildings, especially schools, occasional
fire-exit drills are advisable for the safety of the occupants.
Intolerable health hazards in plumbing systems include blocked
or leaking pipes, pipes that are prone to freezing and therefore to
bursting, and cracked or defective plumbing fixtures. Inadequate
heating and a lack of natural light or ventilation are hazards
suff ic ient to warrant vacating a bu i ld ing until they are corrected, as
are accumulations of garbage or infestations of verm in. Window
screens to keep out flies and biting insects are a necessity for health
in most areas of the world.
Last in our discussion of critical maintenance problems in
buildings are the human enemies of buildings, namely vandals and
arsonists. When no ulterior motive is apparent, vandalism and arson
seem to occur more frequently in buildings that are either in poor
repair or abandoned. Inhabited buildings in good repair are likely
to su f fer damage only if they seem psychologically threatening to
the vandals. Schools and low-income housing are frequent targets,
especially if they appear authoritarian and depressing. Buildings in
which each inhabitant feels a personal involvement would seem to

243

210.3

be the answer, but we have as yet no sure guidelines for designing
and building such structures.

Sick Building Syndrome

Historically, buildings have been quite leaky of air and have more or
less ventilated themselves. In recent years, largely in response to
calls for increased energy efficiency, we have tended to construct
buildings that are virtually airtight. Unless mechan ical ventilation
is provided in these buildings, moisture levels in the interior air
can rise to levels such that various molds and mildews will grow on
surfaces and in ductwork. We have begun to use more and more
synthetic materials in buildings, some of which emit gases such as
formaldehyde. An airtight bu i ld ing can also create problems with
fue l -bu rn ing appliances that can 't get enough air for clean combus-
tion, causing them to give off carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide
to the interior air. From problems such as these has arisen the recent
phenomenon of sick building syndrome, a catch-all term that refers
to buildings whose in ter ior air quality is so bad that it makes many of
the occupants ill.
Because of its many possible sources, the causes of sick bu i ld ing
syndrome in a specific bu i ld ing are often d i f f icu lt to diagnose. In
most cases, a cause can be found, and remed ial action can be taken.
Sometimes merely cleaning the air-conditioning ductwork will cure
the problem. It may be necessary to provide equ ipment to lower the
hum id i ty of the in ter ior air. Moldy or mildewed materials may have
to be removed and replaced. Combustion air inlets for furnaces
sometimes help by reduc ing the likelihood that noxious combustion
products such as sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide will be gener-
ated by the fire. In the meantime, buildings often must be evacuated
un t il the problem is solved.
Vinyl wall coverings in the interiors of bu i ld ings in hot, hum id
climates have often been problematic. These sheet materials are
often impervious to water vapor and air, but when it is hot outdoors
and cool indoors, they are on the cool side of the vapor retarder,
which is the wrong side. Moisture accumulates on the back side of
the wall covering, where it creates ideal conditions for the growth of
molds and mildew. Manufacturers of the material have responded
by developing pervious versions and by treating the material with
long-lasting fung ic ides at the time of manu fac tu re.

Routine Building Maintenance

Routine bu i ld ing ma in tenance 
includes many sorts of repair,
renewal, and cleaning operations. On the exterior of a bu i ld ing,
impervious wall surfaces such as glazed tile, porcelain enamel

244

on steel, glass, a lum inum, and stainless steel have extremely long
lifetimes under normal circumstances and need no maintenance
other than periodic washing and occasional replacement of the mortar
or sealant between units. Exterior paints, stains, and varnishes deteri-
orate quickly in sunlight and rain and must be renewed every few
years. With white paint this rapid degradation has some advantage,
because the progressive chalking and washing away of the surface of
the paint film keep the coating clean and bright in appearance.
The droppings of pigeons, starlings, sparrows, gulls, and other
birds contribute to exterior maintenance problems on some build-
ings. Eliminating snug crannies from the exteriors of buildings
deals with much of the d iff icu l ty. Devices that produce unpleasant
sounds or electric shocks, or that have rows of spikes to prevent roost-
ing, may be needed in extreme cases.
Window glass quickly accumulates layers of dirt on both sides. In
time these will obscure vision and block daylight. Periodic washing
is made easier by using window types that allow both sides of the
glass to be reached from inside the building. Otherwise, ladders
are necessary to reach the windows of low buildings, and movable
suspended staging is needed for taller buildings. One glass manu-
fac turer markets a glass with a transparent catalytic coating on the
exterior that works with sunlight to convert most dirt to soluble com-
pounds that wash away in the ra in. The additional cost of this glass
is often jus t if iab le because of the reduction in glass maintenance
expense over the life of the building.
Windows must be designed to make occasional replacement of
broken panes easy, preferably working from inside the building.
Most glazing compounds (the gummy substances in which glass
is bedded) harden with age and eventually crack and fall away,
needing replacement. Window frames need periodic inspection
for corrosion, decay, leakage of air or water, excessive tightness or
looseness of operation, and wear or breakage of hardware.
Interior surfaces of buildings are generally safe from the destruc-
tive effects of sun, rain, and wind, but they are exposed instead to the
wear, tear, and soil of human occupancy. Walls and ceilings collect
dust and dirt from the air and from the hands, heads, feet, and fur-
niture placed against them. In areas such as kitchens and bathrooms
where walls are especially exposed to soiling, gloss or semi-gloss
enamel paints make them easier to wash. Smooth wainscots of glazed
ceramic tile or plastic laminate are advisable in wet locations (21.4).
Doors, windows, and their wooden casings are usually coated with
gloss or semi-gloss finishes to make finger marks easy to remove.
When interiors are repainted, the first step is to fill any plaster cracks.
Serious plaster cracking is often indicative of structural problems or
water leakage, however, and should not be smoothed over before a
diagnosis can be made and corrective action taken. When choosing

245

21.4

colors of paint, wallpaper, or wood paneling, we should consider what
effect the new color will have on lighting levels in the room. Only
white and the very lightest tints are highly reflective of light. Other
colors absorb much or most of the light that strikes them and may
create an effect that is both excessively somber and intolerably dark.
Floors, which undergo the abrasions of grit trodden underfoot,
are the most subject to wear of any interior building surfaces. They
also are a source of dust that is kicked up by passing feet and
deposited on walls and furn ish ings. Floor maintenance is therefore
the largest single component of day-to-day building care. We can
keep out much foot-borne dirt by providing a doormat or grille at the
entrance door. Vacuuming, dusting, sweeping, and scrubbing remove
dirt before it piles up too deeply. Waxing some types of floor surfaces
offers some protection against wear and makes washing or dusting
the floor considerably easier. Floors of hard stone or hard tile are
highly resistant to abrasion and are easily washed. Soft stone, soft
tile, and wood floors are abraded much more quickly. In most cases,
wood floors can be sanded and revarnished after severe abrasion. Soft
tiles and stones occasionally need replacement. On public stairways,
where wear is exceptionally severe and eroded stairs present a par-
ticular safety problem, hard materials should be used. Stair treads
are available with nonslip surfaces made of extremely hard abrasives.
The maintenance of floors, countertops, and wainscots is easier,
and their appearance generally improved, if the ir surface is mottled,
streaked, or patterned. Such textures camouflage small splotches
and streaks of dirt, making them much less noticeable than they
would be on a plain-colored surface. Plain-colored surfacing
materials frequently cost more than otherwise identical mottled
ones, because even the tiniest manu fac tu r ing defect will be cause
for rejecting a plain-colored product, whereas it might not be
noticed in a mottled one.
Graff i ti can be a large problem in public places. The would-be
artist usually is discouraged if faced with a surface so rough, irregu-
lar, or richly patterned that any superimposed message is likely to be
illegible, if it is possible to apply it in the first place. An exceptionally
smooth, easily cleaned or easily repapered surface, on the other
hand, encourages the addition of ad hoc names, notes, and pictures.
As long as the accumulating pattern is pleasing, it can be retained.
Obscenity or excessive messiness can be obliterated, and the process
can begin anew. Graffiti-resistant surface coatings that repel most
types of paints and markers are effective on some types of surfaces.
Except for its mechanical systems, a building has few moving
parts that need care. Drawers, doors, and windows require occasional
adjustment and lubrication. Hinges, latches, and locks are especi-
ally prone to wear and breakage. Doors that accommodate large

246

numbers of people, in markets, schools, and other public buildings,
require more frequent maintenance and occasional replacement of
worn working parts. Ball-bearing hinges greatly reduce wear and can
be he lpful in reducing maintenance costs for swinging doors in
heavily used buildings.
All the mechanical systems in a bu i ld ing require systematic pro-
grams of maintenance. The air filters of heating, ventilating, and
cooling equipment must be cleaned or replaced at regular intervals.
Burners need at least annual cleaning and ad jus tment for max imum
efficiency of combustion. Motors, fans, pumps, and compressors
require lubrication and replacement of rubber belts.
Plumbing fixtures must be cleaned regularly and their drains kept
free of obstructions. Faucets and toilet valves need constant repair.
Water supply piping may in time fill with mineral scale and have to
be replaced. Waste piping is prone to clog now and then with hair,
paper, cooking fats, or invading tree roots. Devices ranging from
a length of stiff wire to elaborate rotary knives on the end of a long
cable can be introduced at cleanout ports in the piping to clear
the obstacles. Water heaters are especially susceptible to scaling
from mineral-laden water, and their electrical or fuel-burning
components need periodic attention.
Incandescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes, and fluorescent ballasts
are the items in a building 's electrical system requiring the most
frequent replacement. Regular cleaning of fixtures and occasional
cleaning and painting of ceilings and walls to renew their reflectiv-
ity of light are also required for maximum performance of the elec-
trical lighting system. Light switches and electrical appliances wear
out relatively quickly. The other components of the electrical system
do not usually wear out, but electrical systems as a whole become
obsolete fa i r ly rapidly. Older systems are universally too small in
capacity, do not furn ish enough outlets, and do not meet today's
standards of grounding and shock protection. Future developments
are certain to eclipse today's most up-to-date wiring installations in a
few years. Fortunately, new wiring is fa ir ly easily installed in existing
structures, especially where plenty of capacity is available in con-
duits, which are metal or plastic tubes within which wiring is run.
Elevators and escalators are generally serviced at frequent inter-
vals by specialists associated with the manufacturers of the devices,
and they are inspected regularly for safety by representatives of the
local municipality. Elevators in particular are extremely complex
and diverse in their mechanisms and controls and are subjected
to heavy wear. Because elevators also present a un ique potential
for human disaster, their mechanisms are designed with very large
factors of safety; numerous safety devices are incorporated into
their design; and maintenance must be frequent and thorough.

247

Designing for Growth and Change

Among the more subtle skills of an experienced designer is the art
of using the natural forces of deterioration to improve the building
over time. There are few things more satisfying than seeing a build-
ing grow more attractive with age, rather than shabbier. To con-
struct such a bu i ld ing, we must first recognize that the surfaces of
the bu i ld ing are both the visible face of the bu i ld ing and the sur-
faces that must withstand the abuse of sun, rain, wind, soot, dirt, and
human wear. Any material that grows steadily worse in appearance
when exposed to these forces should be avoided. A new car fu rn ishes
numerous examples of such materials: When it emerges from the
showroom, it gleams seductively with bright, flawless enamel, pol-
ished chrom ium, and sparkling curves of glass. It cradles the human
body in p lump, sh in ing tufts of upholstery amid deep-pile carpeting.
With each passing day, however, the car becomes less attractive:
The paintwork chalks and fades. Any scratch or dent in the sheet
metal is immediately visible as a prominent blemish. Rust spots mar
the chrom ium. The glass and paintwork, because of their ultra-
smooth surfaces, tend to look even d ir t ier than they really are. The
upholstery sags and the carpets accumulate dirt that refuses to be
coaxed out. A motorist who buys a car for its visual appeal is doomed
to a life of constant ma in tenance and ultimate disappointment,
because the car will never again look as good as it did on the day it
was purchased.
Consider, by contrast, a sloping roof made of cedar shingles. The
shingles are somewhat garishly colorful when installed but rather
quickly begin to turn gray in the sunlight and ra in. For some months
they are not very attractive but look a bit dirty and streaky. Then the
colors begin to blend and deepen, and the roof takes on a comfort-
able, silvery gray tone that becomes r icher with the passing years.
Rain erodes the softer bands of spring growth from the grain of the
wood and adds texture to the roof. Lichens or mosses may add color.
With no ma in tenance at all, the roof will not only last for several
decades but will actually grow more attractive each year. The auto-
mobile starts life with a perfection of finish that can only grow less
perfect with age, whereas the cedar roof sidesteps the question of
perfection entirely and acquires an ever-richer patina whose beauty
has no l im i t.
There are many bu i ld ing materials that have this same quality.
Redwood and cypress are similar to cedar in their weathering prop-
erties. Unf in ished interior wood in tabletops, doors, and railings that
is constantly handled and rubbed looks sporty for a time but then
begins to glow with the natural polish given it by human hands.
Brass door handles are etched chemically over time by the sweat of

248

hands, to expose the fasc ina t ing crystalline pattern of the metal.
Copper in the outdoor environment changes slowly from a bright,
reflective orange metal to a rich tapestry of blue-green oxide. The
oxide clings tightly to the metal to protect it from fu r ther deteriora-
tion. Lead roofs oxidize to a pleasant white. A lum inum is a metal
with similarly self-protective oxides, but the oxides look dirty and
streaky and are not especially attractive. Accordingly, most exterior
a lum inum is chemically oxidized in the factory, often with the addi-
tion of a permanent black or brown color, and becomes a material
that grows neither better nor worse with age. Most ferrous metals
rust destructively, but a steel alloy has been developed that forms a
tenacious, self-protecting oxide and assumes a pleasing color and
texture after an initial period of splotchiness.
Masonry generally looks progressively better as it accumulates
grime and as the mortar weathers to a more subtle color. Climbing
vines fu r ther enhance its beauty year by year. Unglazed ceramic tile
floors or floors of natural stone slabs often wear into pleasing con-
tours underfoot. Glazed ceramic surfaces on masonry change little
in appearance over the years and present a bright counterpoint
to the softening, deepening colors of the materials about them.
Because age so often darkens colors, surfaces that begin life dark in
color tend to age more gracefully than light surfaces do. If a surface
of white paint or whitewash, however, is frequently renewed, it will
in time become pleasantly smooth in texture and will show off to
good advantage ad jo in ing areas of darker colors.
Surfaces made up of many small units generally age more
attractively and are easier to repair than large, smooth planes. A
crack or flaw in a floor-to-ceiling sheet of glass is visually annoying,
potentially dangerous, and requires a skilled crew and expensive
equ ipment to replace. But cracks in a small pane or two of a large
multipane window are not particularly disturbing to the eye and do
not require replacement of the panes unless they leak water or air. If
replacement is necessary, a single semiskilled person can do it with
a couple of dollars' worth of materials. The large sheet of plate glass
must be washed to perfection every few weeks if it is to appear clean,
whereas the multipane window can get quite dirty before it becomes
disturbingly so. Similarly, a courtyard paved with bricks or small
stones has maintenance advantages over one paved in concrete or
asphalt. A wall paneled in narrow wood boards is apt to age more
gracefully than one made of large sheets of beautifully veneered
plywood. A floor of irregular stones or primitive clay tiles shows
less evidence of the ravages of time than does one of polished
marble slabs.
Secondhand building materials offer many advantages with respect
to their visual characteristics: They are already worn, weathered,

249

and hardened by time. In many cases they have already acquired
a pleasant patina. They are often richer in design and detail than
contemporary materials. They are sometimes cheaper than new
materials. And they generally br ing a welcome sense of history and
continuity with the past into a new bu i ld ing. They blend more and
more naturally with the bu i ld ing as it acquires marks of the in ju r i e s,
repairs, and changes of its own l ife t ime, to produce a structure that
records its own history on its exposed surfaces.
Buildings should be able to absorb life's hard knocks without
looking the worse for them. Normal weathering and wear should
not d im in ish the beauty of the finishes. Reasonable amoun ts of d irt
and grime should look quite acceptable on the various surfaces of
the building. And the normal, pleasant clutter of the various objects
of people's daily lives should not look out of place because the build-
ing seems to have been constructed for superfastidious visitors from
another planet. Bu i ld ing ma in tenance is not an end in itself but
is intended to make life more livable for the building 's inhabitants.
Addition and remodeling are eventually important to the useful-
ness of most buildings. Through these processes, a bu i ld ing can
grow and adapt to changing hum an requirements, and the useful
life of a bu i ld ing can be extended indef in i te ly. Remodeling usually
involves removing at least some of the interior finishes, partitions,
and mechanical equ ipment of a bu i ld ing, reconf igur ing the interior
and perhaps the facades, and applying new finishes. Remodeling is
more d iff icu lt if the interior has many load-bearing partitions or if
the floor structure is d i f f icu lt to cut and change, as it is in many con-
crete buildings. It is easier if partitions, floors, stairs, and mechanical
services are relatively simple to demount and relocate.
Adding onto a bu i ld ing is possible in the horizontal direction, the
vertical direction, or both. For vertical additions, much expense and
disruption can be avoided if the original s truc ture is made to accept
additional floors without overstressing the columns and if elevators,
stairs, and mechanical systems are planned from the outset to serve
the extension. Horizontal additions are bound to look awkward
if the original bu i ld ing is a complete, closed form like a dome, a
cylinder, a cube, or a hyperbolic paraboloid shell. They are easiest
to fit when the original bu i ld ing rambles a bit already and when
one or more natural points of connection are provided along the
periphery of the existing pedestrian circulation system.

Re-Use of Buildings

Buildings can adapt well to changes in use over t ime. We continue
to live, study, worship, and conduct business in buildings that in
many cases are centuries old and that have had to change many

250

times over that period. Re-use is easier if the bu i ld ing has large,
unobstructed, rectilinear spaces, movable partitions, and readily
accessible mechanical and electrical components. It is more
d iff icu lt if the building has load-bearing interior partitions, short
structural spans, or a form that is very specific to a particular use,
such as a chapel or theater.
With periodic remodeling and constant maintenance, a building
can live for a very long time. A number of buildings from Roman
times are still in use. Even a wooden building, if kept safe from
water and fire, can last for centuries. But buildings are abandoned
or torn down every day. Sometimes health or safety problems are
the reason. Sometimes a building simply cannot be brought up
to modern standards of convenience because it is too small or its
original configuration is too unyielding to alteration. More com-
monly, a building becomes uneconomic, through changing needs
of its occupants, excessive costs of maintenance and repair, or
because it occupies a piece of land so valuable that the owner wishes
to build a much larger building in order to maximize the return on
investment. In most such circumstances, the building is dismantled
and trucked away in pieces by a building demolition contractor.
Some of its components may be saved and sold, but usually the
entire bu i ld ing ends as broken chunks in a dump.
In rural areas it is not d i f f icu lt to find a barn or shed dying a
natural death after many years of service (21.5). It is sad to know that
the optimism, human energy, and skill that originally went into the
making of the building are now to be lost forever, but it is a joyous
experience to see how Nature takes back the building materials it
once yielded, to convert them to other uses. There is dignity in the
sagging of decaying wood and reassurance in the slow absorption
of the wood by the earth. There is beauty in the gentle, supremely
patient attack of Nature on masonry and concrete, as weather
softens the surfaces, and tendrils of plants reach into tiny pores
and cracks to begin the long process of prying and wedging that will
someday, probably lifetimes hence, reduce even these materials to
earth. The plants gradually cover the dying bu i ld ing with a shroud
of green leaves and bright blossoms, and it becomes a new object in
the landscape, a picturesque promise of the new and better order
with which Nature will replace it.

Further Reading

Mohsen Mostafavi and David Leatherbarrow. On Weathering: The Life of
Buildings in Time. Cambridge, Mass., the M.I.T. Press, 1993.

251

21.5

22

Builaingf Components
and Building Function

So far we have examined the characteristics of the outdoor envir-
onment, compared them with the environmental requirements of
people and society, and noted the range of functions that we expect
a bu i ld ing to perform in reconciling the d ifferences between the
two. We have discussed at considerable length the various physical
mechanisms employed in buildings to pe r fo rm these functions. It
now rema ins to look br ief ly at the common components from which
we assemble buildings, to see what func t ions we expect each to per-
form, and by what combination of mechanisms each works. Simple
words such as wall or roof denote very complicated components that
perform a surprising range of func t ions in a bu i ld ing.
Let us begin with the component we call the site (22.1). The site is
a building's all-important outer perimeter of devices for modifying
the outdoor environment. Trees on the site can block the sun's rays,
cool the air, divert the winter wind, and provide visual privacy. The
site can keep water away from the foundations. It can protect a
bu i ld ing from noise or fire by keeping it su f f ic ien t ly distant from
neighboring buildings. By careful placement and orientation of the
bu i ld ing on the site, useful outdoor areas can be created; pockets of
warmer or cooler microclimate can be set up; and the penetration of
the sun into the bu i ld ing can be controlled for optimum comfort
in all the seasons of the year. For many buildings, the site also pro-
vides water and disposes of sewage. It may even provide food from
a vegetable garden, an orchard, or a chicken coop.
A second perimeter of devices to modify the environment is
contained in the enclosure of the building. Here the ma jor work of
the bu i ld ing is done: Sunlight is blocked, selectively admitted, or
reflected. The passage of air, heat, moisture, sound, and living crea-
tures is closely controlled. Level surfaces are created and stacked

252

22.1

for human occupancy, supported on walls or columns. The enclosed
volume is divided into a convenient arrangement of rooms, linked
by passages both vertical and horizontal.
Within these two concentric perimeters, the site and the enclo-
sure, are the active mechanisms that generate or remove heat, cir-
culate air, provide light, energize tools, distribute water, and collect
liquid wastes. It is best to restrict the role of active devices insofar as
possible to that of fine tun ing the internal environment to optimum
conditions, once the heavy work of environmental modification has
been performed by the passive devices of the site and the bu i ld ing
enclosure. Such a design approach has the advantage, of course, of
cutting down on energy consumption in the building. Even more
important, it offers max imum comfort and convenience by leveling
out temperature flows, reducing noise from mechanical equipment,
reducing air pollution, and providing more favorable levels of
natural i l lum ina t ion. This approach also helps place people in a
more natural relationship with the outdoor environment, one in
which they can understand and appreciate more fully the majestic
cycles of Nature and the relationship of these cycles to human life.
Machines, no matter how powerful, can never substitute fully for
the good design judgment of the architect who sites and configures
the building, for it is the enclosure of the building, not the mechan-
ical equipment, that must create the basic conditions for human
satisfaction, both spiritual and physical.
We are able to make satisfactory buildings, it would seem, from
almost anything. Some materials need little processing: mud,
broken stone, fieldstone, snow, grasses, reeds, leaves, bamboo, nat-
ural asphalt, tree trunks and branches. With a modest expenditure
of time and energy, we can make hard-fired bricks, squared lumber,
paper, stone blocks, and plaster. With still more processing, cement,
glass, metals, rubber, and plastics become available. We build with
what we can obtain in a given locale, within a given set of economic
restrictions. Through the military, the Peace Corps, or foreign archi-
tectural commissions, American architects and engineers have often
found themselves bu i ld ing with mud, straw, or bamboo, seeking to
cope with un fam i l iar climates and patterns of life. Even our own life
patterns continue to change, and new materials of construction
reach the market every month, each promising certain advantages
over the materials it hopes to replace.
In such situations, architects learn to evaluate new or un fam i l iar
materials with regard to what each can do best and what its dis-
advantages and weaknesses are. How strong is a material in tension,
compression, and shear? How will it be affected by water? Will it
allow water vapor to pass? What are its thermal properties? How
much will it expand and contract with changes in moisture or tem-

253

22.2

perature? Can its surface be left exposed in a floor or wall? How will
the material be affected by fire? What are its acoustical properties?
How can the material best be put in place? How will it cope with
normal wear and weathering? If laboratory test figures are unavail-
able, we can still judge these qualities rather well by hefting, pulling,
poking, bending, scratching, wetting, and holding a match to the
sample or by seeing how the material is used and has endured in
existing buildings. Having learned what the material can and cannot
do, we must then determine where it can be of use in a building and
with what other materials it should be teamed to make bu i ld ing
components that perform all the func t ions required of them.
The accompanying table (22.2) shows the ma jor func t ions per-
formed by various bu i ld ing components. An exterior wall probably
serves more important func t ions than does any other part of a

254

building. No single material can do all these jobs well. As a result,
even the wall of an ordinary wood-frame residence is extraordinarily
sophisticated in its combination of materials. Reading from exterior
to interior, such a wall might include several coats of exterior paint,
wood siding, an airspace that acts as a pressure equalization
chamber, a spun-bonded polypropylene air barrier paper, plywood
sheathing, wood two-by-six framing, mineral-fiber insulation, elec-
trical wiring, heating ducts, a plastic sheet vapor retarder, gypsum
wallboard, and several coats of interior paint. About fifteen separate
construction operations, carried out by six d ifferent construction
trades, are required to make this wall. But its efficiency in perform-
ing its appointed functions is unsurpassed.
Windows and doors are special cases of "wall"; they are designed
to allow controlled penetration of the wall's environmental
defenses. A door primarily controls the passage of people but often
acts as a valve or filter for the selective passage of air, heat, animals,
insects, and light. A window is one of the most fascinating of
the building 's components. A standard residential window of the
most common type allows for the simultaneous and independent
control of

• natural illumination;
• natural ventilation;
• view out;
• view in;
• passage of insects;
• passage of water; and
• passage of hea t— rad ian t, conducted, convected.

Considering this multiplicity of functions, a window is a surpris-
ingly simple mechanism. To architects, the possibilities of a window
are limitless. To design a single window for a bu i ld ing involves
consideration of

• orientation of window;
• location of window in the wall;
• size of window;
• proportions of window;
• external shading devices;
• mode of window operation (fixed, sliding, etc.);
• material and color of frame;
• type of glass;
• type of shade or shutter;
• type of curtain, material, color; and
• type of insect screen.

255

Windows are important not only as func t ional elements of the
bu i ld ing enclosure but also as ma jor elements of the visual patterns
of both in ter ior and exterior, as revealers of par t icu lar views, as illu-
minators of interior space, as gatherers of solar heat, and sometimes
as the means of passage between interior and exterior. To achieve
our design goals in these many respects, we must learn to manip-
ulate the technical choices at our disposal. The results can approach
the sub l ime: A sunny, plant-filled bay window. A cathedral rose
window of r ich ly colored stained glass. A large sheet of glass that
hovers invisibly before a panoramic view of a wooded valley below.
A snug window seat for reading on a ra iny Saturday afternoon. A
skylight that illuminates a bright tapestry. But the results can also be
mundane, even depressing: A "picture window" that pictures only
a street fu ll of parked cars and simultaneously destroys in ter ior
privacy. A tenement window that faces on a bleak air shaft. A too-
small window that leaves an interior space too dark.
The story is much the same for each of the other components of
a bu i ld ing: Each must serve a multiplicity of func t ions. Each must
be made of a combination of materials of complementary capabil-
ities. Each offers to us its un ique set of aesthetic possibilities to be
exploited or, at our peril, to be ignored. These components are the
bu i ld ing blocks of arch i tec ture, the only stuff with which we can
work the un ique magic that results in a satisfying building. The most
solid basis for architectural creativity is an ordered and acces-
sible knowledge of how buildings work. There is a natural order to
architecture, and true design freedom springs from an everyday,
easy fam i l ia r i ty with this order.
This book has outlined the natural order of physical func t ion in
bu i ld ings. Arch i tec ture has other impor tant func t ions, too—each
bu i ld ing serves an economic func t ion, ju s t i fy ing its existence in
dollars and cents, and a symbolic function, evoking emotions in those
who experience it. But these are the provinces of other books. Here
the message is simply that the scientific fundamentals of building
are always the same. A house of snow in the Arctic obeys the same
physical laws as does one of bamboo in the tropics, and a steel-
framed skyscraper is not so far removed from a tree house as we
would sometimes believe. If we unde rs tand from first principles
how to moderate the forces of Na ture for hum an occupancy, we are
prepared to bu i ld well under any circumstances.

256

Glossary

Absorbtance: The proportion of incident heat radiation that
enters a body and raises its temperature, expressed as a
decimal fraction of one.
Absorption cycle: A heat pump process in which the hygro-
scopic property of a concentrated salt solution is used to
evaporate liquid from a vessel and thereby to cool the liquid.
Abutment joint: A jo int that allows for relative movement
between dissimilar materials that meet at the joint.
AC: See Alternating current.
Acoustical privacy: A state in which intelligible sound is not
transmitted between users of a building.
Acoustic tiles: Small units of ceiling finish material that absorb
a ma jor percentage of incident sound.
Activated charcoal filtration: The cleansing of air or water
by passing it through a volume of charcoal that is specially
produced to have a large ratio of surface area to volume.
Active: Adjective for any system that requires the application of
energy from an external source for its func t ion, as contrasted
with a passive system, which uses only ambient flows of
energy.
Adiabatic: Changing volume without the loss or gain of heat.
Aerobic: Taking place in the presence of oxygen.
Air barrier: A sheet material or coating that is designed to pre-
vent the passage of air through the enclosure of a building.
Air chamber: A short, capped extension of a p lumb ing supply
line that contains air that acts as a cushion to absorb the
shocks that would otherwise cause water hammer.
Air, combustion: Air whose oxygen content is used to sustain a
flame.
Air-inflated structure: A structure made up of one or more
tubes of thin, airtight material which are stiffened against
buckling by being inflated with air.
Air-supported structure: A structure made up of a thin, airtight
material that is supported by a slight air pressure in the
inhabited space that it shelters.
Allowable stress: See Stress, allowable.

Alternating current (AC): Electricity delivered in the form of
current that reverses polarity at rapid, regular intervals, usu-
ally 50 or 60 times per second.
Ambient: Occurring naturally in the environment.
Anaerobic: Taking place without the presence of oxygen.
Anticlastic: Saddle-shaped, curved positively along one prin-
ciple axis and negatively along the other.
Aqueduct: A large pipe or channel that transports water from a
distant source to a city.
Arc fau lt circuit interrupter: A device that shuts off electricity to
any circuit on which a spark or arc is being generated.
Arch: A structural device, usually concave on its underside,
that translates applied loads, usually vertical, into inclined
forces that flow along the axis of the device.
Area of refuge: An area w i th in a bu i ld ing that is securely pro-
tected against heat, smoke, and flames in case of fire.
Artesian well: A vertical hole in the ground, dug or drilled, that
fills with water because of subterranean pressure.
Artificial lighting: Lighting other than daylighting, usually
electric lighting.
Atmospheric inversion: A stagnant layer of cold air near the
ground.
Atrium: An interior courtyard in a building, often covered with
a skylight.
Automatic sprinkler system: See Sprinkler system, automatic.
Autumnal equinox: The day in late September when the
north-south axis of the earth lies perpendicular to the sun's
rays. Day and night have the same length on the autumnal
and vernal equinoxes.
Awning: A sloping, rooflike cover projecting outward over a
window or door.
Awning window: An operating window whose sash is hinged
along a horizontal axis on or near its top edge.
Backer rod: A ropelike cylinder of soft plastic foam that is
pressed into a joint to limit the depth to which a mastic
sealant material will penetrate.

257

Ballast, fluorescent: An electrical assembly in a fluorescent
light fixture that serves both to provide the high voltage
necessary to start the lamp and to limit the current to the
lamp once it is started.
Base plate: A steel slab that serves to spread the heavy load
from a steel co lumn over an area of concrete large
enough that the allowable stress of the concrete is not
exceeded.
Beam: A solid structural member that resists transverse bend-
ing forces by means of a latticelike pattern of internal forces
of tension and compression.
Bearing wall: A vertical, planar bu i ld ing element that supports
superimposed gravity loads.
Bioremediation: Using life processes in plants to pu r i fy sewage
and other toxic wastes.
Brittle: Having little tensile strength and a tendency to break
without warning.
Builder, custom: A person or company that bu i lds buildings to
order.
Bu i lder, speculative: A person or company that builds build-
ings before their buyers are known.
Bus bar: A rectangular strip of highly conductive metal, usually
copper or a lum inum, used to carry large quantities of elec-
tricity to points of distribution in a bu i ld ing.
Buttress: A structural device made of concrete, brickwork, or
stonework in which the dead weight of the material com-
bines with the angular thrusts of vaults or arches to produce
a resultant force whose line of action falls safely w i th in the
foundations of a building.
Buttress, engaged: A buttress that is integral with the walls of
the building.
Buttress, flying: A buttress that uses inclined arches to reach
across an intervening space such as a church aisle to brace
the central portion of the building.
Bu i ld ing separation joint: A planar discontinuity through a
bu i ld ing to divide the building into smaller buildings that
are able to move without distress.
Caisson: A vertical, co lumnar founda t ion element made of
concrete cast into a hole drilled in the ground so that it rests
on a firm layer of soil or rock at some distance below the
surface. Also the cylindrical steel shell used to prevent the
drilled hole from collapsing.
Camber: An upward curvature bu i lt into a beam so that the
beam will be flat when it is fu l ly loaded.
Cant strip: A beveled piece of material that prevents a sharp,
go-degree crease in a roofing membrane where it goes from
a horizontal roof deck to a vertical parapet wall or perimeter
curb.
Cantilever: The portion of a beam or truss that projects beyond
its nearest point of support.
Capillary action: The drawing of water through a fine crack or
small hole by the combined forces of cohesion in water and
adhesion between water and the material through which it is
drawn.
Capillary break: An intentional w iden ing of a crack or hole so
that a drop of water cannot bridge across it and pass through
by capillary action.

Casement window: An opening window that is hinged on a
vertical axis at or near a side jamb.
Ca tchment area: An area of ground or roof used to collect
ra inwa ter.
Catenary: The curve of a cable or chain that hangs freely under
its own weight.
CAV: See Constant air volume system.
Cavity wall: A masonry wall that contains a vertical, planar
airspace that is intended to eliminate water leakage through
the wall and, incidentally, to reduce heat flow through the
wall.
Cement, portland: A dry, gray powder that is mixed with water to
form a binder for concrete. Not to be confused with concrete—
there is no such thing as a cement sidewalk or a cement slab.
Centering: A structure used temporarily to support an arch,
dome, or vault du r ing its construction.
Cesspool: A pit in the ground used to disperse sewage into the
ground without first digesting it; generally illegal.
Chair: A device used to support steel reinforcing bars until con-
crete has been poured around them and cured.
Chase: A hollow space provided in a bu i ld ing to house a run of
pipes, wires, and/or ducts.
Chiller: A machine that produces cold water for cooling a
building.
Chimney: A vertical tube to conduct smoke out of a building.
Chord: The top or bottom elements in a truss.
Circuit: A single run of electrical wiring that serves a limited
number of fixtures and/or receptacles.
C i rcu it breaker: A device that shuts off electrical flow auto-
matically if the capacity of an electrical c ircu it is exceeded,
thus preventing damage to the c ircu it and building.
Cistern: A vessel for the storage of water.
Clerestory: A vertical window placed at the junc t ion of two roof
planes that meet at d ifferent levels.
Cloud gel: An extremely low-density, transparent solid that can
be used as an insu la t ing material between panes of glass in a
multiple glazing assembly.
Column: A vertical, l inear element of structure that supports
pr imar i ly vertical loads.
Combustion air: See Air, combustion.
Compartmentation: The partitioning of a bu i ld ing into smaller
units by means of fire-resistant walls and floors to restrict the
spread of fire.
Compensated foundation: See Foundation, floating.
Composite: Made of two or more materials that work together.
Compost: The product of fermentation of organic waste
materials, used to mod ify soil to increase its agricultural
productivity.
Compression: A squeezing together.
Compression cycle: A heat pump process in which a working
fluid is compressed and cooled, then allowed to expand and
absorb heat.
Compressive stress: The 
intensity of a squeezing action,
expressed in units of force per un it area.
Concrete: A rocklike material made by mixing together gravel
or crushed stone, sand, and a b inder of portland cement and
water.

258

Concrete, air-entrained: Concrete that contains microscopic
air bubbles. Air-entrained concrete flows more freely when
freshly mixed and is much more resistant to freeze-thaw
damage than ordinary concrete.
Condensate: A liquid created by condensing a gas, such as
the liquid water produced when moist air contacts a cold
surface.
Condensation: The changing of a material from a gaseous state
to a liquid state.
Condenser: A component of a steam-driven power plant in
which spent steam is cooled to return it to a liquid state.
Conduction: The passage of heat or electricity through a solid
material.
Conduit: A plastic or metal tube through which electric wires
pass.
Constant air volume system (CAV): A heating and /or cooling
system in which the rate of air circulation is constant, but
the temperature of the air varies.
Continuity: In a structure, the property of having structural
elements joined rigidly together so that they act as a single
unit.
Control joint: An intentional, usually straight-line crack in a
surface of material that tends to shrink, used to avoid
random cracking in the material.
Convection: Circulation that is powered by the difference in
density between warm and cool air or water.
Convective: Using convection as a mode of heat transfer.
Convector: A device for heating air by means of steam or hot
water that circulates through metal tubing that is exposed to
the air. A convector usually has many metallic fins attached
to the tubing to increase its surface area. The fin-tube
assembly is usually housed in a sheet-metal enclosure with
openings for the circulation of air.
Cooling, radiational: The cooling of the earth at night by direct
radiation of terrestrial heat into the blackness of space.
Corbel: A masonry structural device in which each brick or
stone projects slightly over the one below it.
Crawl space: A continuous access area, not tall enough to stand
in, beneath the ground floor of a building.
Creep: The long-term shortening of concrete under compres-
sive stress.
Cross connection: A fau l ty p lumb ing installation that allows
sewage or contaminated water to be drawn into water supply
pipes if water pressure in the pipes should fa i l.
Crown: A slight upward curvature in the paving of a road; a
curvature in a piece of lumber.
Curtain board: A noncombustible sheet material that hangs
from the ceiling of an industrial bu i ld ing to help restrict the
spread of fire through the building.
Damper: A metal flap that acts as a valve for air flow in a duct,
a fuel-burning appliance, or a fireplace.
Damp-proof coating: A thin asphaltic coating applied to the
outside of a building foundation wall in order to limit the
penetration of moisture through the wall.
Daylighting: Lighting the interior of a bu i ld ing with direct or
indirect light from the sun.
DC: See Direct current.

Dead load: The weight of bu i ld ing components and other
loads that do not change over time.
Decibel: A measure of the intensity of sound.
Deciduous tree: A tree that drops all its leaves in winter.
Deflection: The amount by which a given point on a structural
member moves when the member is placed under load.
Dehumidifier: A machine that removes moisture from the air,
usually by condensing it on metal coils that are cooled by a
compression cycle.
Dewatering: Lowering the level of water in the soil of a bu i ld-
ing site in order to keep the excavation dry during founda-
tion work.
Dew point: The temperature at which water will begin to con-
dense from a given mass of air.
Diffraction: The bending of light or sound waves by their being
passed over sharp edges, especially a series of edges whose
spacing is similar to the wavelength of the light or sound.
Direct current: A flow of electricity that is constant in polarity
and intensity.
Direct gain system: Heating a bu i ld ing by admitting sunlight
into the inhabited space.
Dome: A structural form consisting of an arch rotated about its
vertical axis. A dome is often a hemisphere or some other
portion of a sphere.
Double-envelope building: A building with two independent,
complete enclosures, one inside the other, with an air space
between.
Double-hung window: A window with two sashes, both of
which slide on vertical tracks.
Double-skin facade: A bu i ld ing wall with two layers separated
by an air space.
Downspout: A vertical pipe that conducts water runoff from a
roof to the ground.
Drainage composite: A thick, highly porous material placed
against the outside of a foundation wall so that ground water
approaching the wall falls down through the material to
drainage pipes at the base of the wall instead of reaching the
outside surface of the wall.
Drip: Any bu i ld ing feature that causes water to fall clear of the
bu i ld ing at that point rather than run along the surface.
Dual duct system: An air conditioning system in which par-
allel ducts carry warm air and cool air. In each room of
the building, thermostatically controlled dampers regulate the
relative amounts of air from each of the two ducts that are
mixed to achieve the desired temperature.
Duct: A round or rectangular tube through which air is
circulated.
Eave: The lowest edge of a sloping roof.
Echo: A reflection of sound that occurs long enough after the
original sound to sound like a separate sound.
Effluent: The supernatant of decomposed sewage.
Elastic modulus: The ratio of stress to deformation in a given
material; a measure of the stiffness of a material.
Emittance: A measure of the ability of a material to radiate heat
to another body.
Equinox: A position in the earth's orbit where the north and
south poles are equidistant from the sun. There are two

259

equinoxes each year, occurring on or about March 21 and
September 21. Day and night are of equal length at all lati-
tudes on these days.
Evaporative cooler: A device in which air is cooled by passing
it through a wetted pad.
Evaporative cooling: Cooling air by causing it to absorb mois-
ture. The latent heat of vaporization of the water is fu rn ished
by the air, wh ich reduces the temperature of the air.
Exit, horizontal: A passage through a self-closing, fire-resistant
door to an area of refuge on the same level of a bu i ld ing.
Expansion joint: A linear device that allows a material to
expand without damaging itself.
Facade: The pr inc ip le face of a building.
Factor of safety: The ratio of the stress for which a structure
is designed to the ultimate stress of the material of the
structure.
Fan room: A space in a bu i ld ing in which fans and other air-
conditioning equipment are located.
Fire cut: A beveled cut on the end of a heavy timber beam or
girder that allows the member to fall harmlessly out of the
wall if the member should bu rn through du r ing a fire, rather
than topple the wall.
Flashing: A continuous strip of metal, plastic, or composite
that acts as a barr ier to the passage of water.
Flat arch: A masonry arch whose top and bottom edges are
straight and level.
Flat-plate collector: A device for gathering heat from the sun
by allowing sunlight to impinge directly upon a flat surface
from which the heat is removed by c ircu la t ing air or l iqu id.
Floating founda t ion: See Foundation, floating.
Fluid-filled structure: A surface that is supported by internal
pressure of air or water.
Fluorescent: A device in which an electrical discharge acti-
vates a phosphor to generate light.
Flue: A tube for evacuating combustion gases.
Flux: A flow of energy.
Flying buttress: See Buttress, flying.
Formwork: A temporary structure of wood, metal, and /or
plastic that gives shape and support to a structure of masonry
or concrete until that structure becomes self-supporting.
Foundation, floating: A foundation in wh ich the weight of the
soil excavated for the building 's basement(s) is equal to the
weight of the building.
Foundation, mat: A single spread footing that is as large in hor-
izontal extent as the bu i ld ing that it supports.
Fun icu lar: Having the shape that would be taken by a flexible
rope or chain that supports a given set of weights, or having
the inversion of that shape.
Fusible link: A connector made of a special alloy with a very
low melting point, used for the automatic control of fire
safety devices.
Gable: A roof consisting of two sloping surfaces that intersect at
a level ridge; the triangular end wall of such a roof.
Gasket: An elastic strip used to seal a jo int between two adja-
cent components.
Glare: Excessive contrast in brightness between a visual task
and its surroundings.

Glass, heat-absorbing: Glass that is tinted so that it absorbs heat
from light that passes through it.
Glass, heat-reflecting: Glass that is coated with a reflecting
layer that bounces back a portion of incident light and heat.
Glass, laminated: Two surface layers of glass bonded to a vis-
cous plastic core.
Glazed: Having a glassy surface.
Glazing: The installation of glass in a building. A transparent
material, usually glass, in a window. The application of a
glassy finish layer to a ceramic material.
Glazing compound: A mastic in wh ich glass is bedded in a
window sash.
Glazing, double or triple: Two or three sheets of glass with air
spaces between.
Grade beam: A concrete beam that spans across isolated
founda t ion elements to provide continuous support for
a wall.
Greenhouse effect: The trapping of solar heat behind a ba r r ier
such as glass in a bu i ld ing or a layer of selectively transparent
gases in the earth's atmosphere.
Ground fau lt interrupter: A device that shuts off the flow of
electricity in a c ircu it if current leaks from the c ircu it to the
ground.
Gutter: A sloping channel that gathers water from the low edge
of a roof surface and conducts it to a downspout.
Guy: A sloping cable that stabilizes a vertical structural
element.
Gypsum: A naturally occurring mineral, calcium sulfate hemi-
hydrate, used to make plaster, wallboard, fireproofing, and
other bu i ld ing materials.
Hard water: See Water, hard.
Heat exchanger: A device for transferring heat from one
med ium to another, such as water to air or air to air.
Heat pump: A device that utilizes either a compression cycle or
an absorption cycle to move heat from a cooler med ium to a
warmer one.
Heat sink: A mass or substance with a very large thermal capa-
city compared to the amounts of heat flowing through a
system.
HID, High-intensity discharge lamp: A type of high-efficiency
device for ar t if ic ial lighting.
Hopper window: A sash that is hinged along the bottom edge
and tilts inward to open.
Horizontal exit: See Exit, horizontal.
Hot wire: A current-carrying electric wire that is not connected
to the ground.
Hum id i ty, relative: The ratio of the amount of water vapor con-
tained by a given mass of air to the max imum amount of
water vapor it could contain at the given temperature.
Hydronic: A system that uses hot water to distribute heat within
a bu i ld ing.
Hyperbolic paraboloid shell: A thin, saddle-shaped concrete
slab used as a self-supporting structure.
Hypothermia: A condition in wh ich the human body is unable
to ma in ta in its normal core temperature.
Ice dam: A barr ier of frozen water across the eave of a roof
beh ind which l iqu id water accumulates.

260

Incandescent: Emitting light as a result of being at a very high
temperature.
Infiltration: The movement of air in or out through cracks and
defects in the enclosure of the building.
Infrared: Electromagnetic wavelengths longer than those of
red light.
Intumescent coating: A layer of pa int or mastic that expands
to form a stable, insulating char when exposed to the heat of
a fire.
Inverse square law: Radiational intensity from a point source
is inversely proportional to the square of distance from the
source.
Inversion: See Atmospheric inversion.
Inverted roof: A low-slope roof construction 
in which
polystyrene foam insulation is placed above the waterproof
membrane.
Invertibility: When any structure is turned upside down with
its external loads rema in ing in their original positions
and directions, the force in each member of the structure
changes from tension to compression or vice versa.
Isolated footing: A concrete founda t ion element that supports
a single column by spreading its load over a large area of
soil.
Joist: A slender beam used repetitively at narrow spacings
to support a ceiling surface or the decking of a floor or
roof.
Knee brace: A temporary diagonal member used to support a
wall or column dur ing construction; a permanent diagonal
member that jo ins a column above its midpoint.
Labyrinth joint: An open jo int between wall panels that is
configured so that there is no straight-line path through the
jo in t.
Lamp: A light bulb or light-emitting tube.
Landing: A broad platform on a stair.
Latent heat: The heat required to change the phase of a
material without changing its temperature.
Lateral force: A force that is considered to act in a horizontal
direction, usually caused by wind, earthquake, soil pressure,
or water pressure.
Lateral support: Structural elements that resist lateral forces in
a bu i ld ing frame.
Lath: Any mesh, strip, or sheet material used as a base to which
to apply plaster or stucco.
LEED System: Acronym for "Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design," a proprietary initiative to evaluate
the sustainability of designs for buildings.
Leaching field: A level bed of crushed stone just below the
surface of the ground into which effluent from a septic
tank is distributed through perforated pipes or open cham-
bers in order that the eff luent will be absorbed by the
soil below.
Light shelf: A light-colored horizontal surface, usually located
above head level, that serves to reflect daylight into the part
of a room that is more distant from the windows.
Lime: Calcium hydroxide, produced by burn ing limestone or
sea shells and adding water. Used in construction as an
ingredient of mortar and plaster.

Lintel: A beam that supports a wall above a window or door
opening.
Live load: The weight exerted on a structure by people, goods,
furn i ture, machinery, vehicles, snow, and other things that
change over time.
Louvers: Closely spaced, parallel strips of material used to
obstruct the passage of light or rain while allowing the pas-
sage of air.
Low-emissivity (Low-e) coating: A th in layer deposited on glass
to make the glass selectively reflective of long-wave infrared
radiation.
Lumen: A un it used to measure the rate at wh ich light is pro-
duced by a lamp.
Luminance: The brightness of a visual task.
Masking noise: Noise intentionally introduced into an envi-
ronment in order to make certain noises less obtrusive, or to
make conversations more private.
Masonry: Brickwork, stonework, or concrete blockwork.
Mastic: A substance that is semiliquid, viscous, and sticky.
Mat founda t ion: See Foundation, mat.
Mean radiant temperature (MRT): The weighted average of
the temperatures of all the objects that exchange thermal
radiation with a given point.
Membrane roof: A low-slope roof that is made waterproof by a
single sheet of impervious material.
Monitor: A boxlike protrusion above a roof that contains
windows and/or ventilating louvers.
Mortar: The substance used between masonry un i ts as a
cushion, spacer, shim, adhesive, and sealant.
MRT: See Mean radiant temperature.
Neutral wire: A wire that is connected to ground.
Night blindness: An inability to see in darkness immediately
after leaving a much brighter environment, due to the time
that it takes the eye to ad ju st from one level of i l lum ina t ion
to another.
Night-sky radiation: Long-wave in f ra red radiation from ter-
restrial objects into space.
Night soil: Human excrement.
Noise: Unwanted sound.
Nosing: The projecting front edge of a stair tread.
One-way: Structural action in a slab or plate that takes place
only in one principal direction.
Panel, truss: A portion of a truss bounded by a top chord, a
bottom chord, and two ad jacent vertical members.
Panic hardware: A door latch release mechanism that works
automatically if pressed against.
Parapet wall: A wall that projects above surround ing roof areas.
Passive: Working by ambient energy flows rather than by the
introduction of energy from outside sources that are under
human control.
Pattern staining: Discoloration of a wall or ceiling caused by the
variable adhesion of dust to surfaces at d ifferent temperatures.
Pediment: The ornamented gable end of a roof in classical
architecture.
Performance bond: An insurance policy that guarantees
money to finish a construction project if the original con-
tractor should fa il to do so.

261

Photovoltaic panel: A group of photocells mounted on a roof
and wired together to produce electricity from sunlight.
Pile: A foundation element consisting of a long, slender piece
of wood, steel, or reinforced concrete driven vertically into
the ground.
Pile, end-bearing: A pile that is driven un t il its lower end rests
on firm soil or rock.
Pile, friction: A pile that develops its load-bearing capacity by
means of fr ic t ion between the sides of the pile and the soil.
Pile driver: A heavy, mechan ical hammer used to drive piles
into the ground.
Portland cement: See Cement, portland.
Post-tensioning: The application of compressive stress to a
concrete structural member by means of internal strands of
high-strength steel that are stretched to a high tension after
the concrete has hardened.
Precast concrete: Concrete that is cast and hardened away
from the bu i ld ing site, then put in place in the bu i ld ing as
rigid elements.
Precipitation, chemical: Causing constituents of a solution or
suspension to fall to the bottom of a container by combining
them chemically with compounds that convert them to
dense solids.
Principal stress, lines of: Lines drawn to trace the directions of
max imum tensile and compressive stresses in a structural
member.
Pressure equalization chamber (PEC): An airspace in an
external building component that is pressurized by the wind
in such a way as to prevent strong air currents from passing
through the wall.
Primary treatment of sewage: Anaerobic fermentation of sewage.
Pyrolysis: The heating of materials to reduce them to their
constituent inorganic components.
Quoins: Square blocks of masonry built into the exterior
corners of a building, originally as a means of stabilizing a
wall made of weak materials, but now as ornament.
Radiation: The passage of electromagnetic waves through
space or air.
Radiational cooling: The cooling of terrestrial objects by radi-
ating heat from the objects to the night sky.
Radiator: A heating device in which heat from steam or hot
water is transferred to the air in a room. The transfer is
achieved mainly by convection, not radiation, but the name
persists.
Rafter: A slender, sloping beam used repetitively at narrow
spacings to support a roof plane.
Rainscreen: The outer layer of a wall that has a pressure equal-
ization chamber and air barr ier.
Raised access floor: A floor made up of rigid, square, remov-
able tiles supported a short distance above a structural floor
on pedestals, so that pipes, wires, and ducts may run freely
beneath to any point in a building.
Recycling: Sending used materials back to factories for repro-
cessing and reuse rather than discarding them.
Reflectance: The proportion of inc ident radiation that is
turned away by a surface, expressed as a decimal frac t ion
of one.

Regenerative wheel: A rotating mass of metal mesh through
wh ich air is blown to transfer heat from the air in one duct to
the air in another.
Reglet: A slot into which a flashing or the edge of a roof
membrane may be tucked.
Regulator, gas: A device for reduc ing and controlling the pres-
sure of gas at the point of use.
Reinforced concrete: Concrete into which steel bars have been
cast to resist tensile stresses.
Reinforcement, sound: Strengthening sound in a performance
hall by means of reflections from surfaces in the hall.
Relative hum id i ty: See Humidity, relative.
Relay: An electrical switch that is activated by another electric
current.
Reservoir: A large container or pond for the storage of water.
Resonator: A hollow chamber that vibrates sympathetically and
thereby absorbs sound energy at a given frequency.
Reverberation time: The time it takes for a loud sound to
diminish to inaudibility in a performance hall.
Ribbed slab: A concrete spanning element consisting of a th in
slab supported by closely spaced, parallel joists.
Ridge: The intersection of two roof slopes in a gable roof.
Rigid frame: A structure in which rigid joints provide lateral
stability.
Rise of an arch: The vertical distance from the lowest part of
the center line of an arch to the highest.
Rise of a stair: The total vertical dimension between the bot-
tom and top of a stair.
Riser: A vertical planar element between two treads in a stair.
Roof, low-slope: A roof that has too shallow a slope for shingles
and must be made waterproof by a continuous membrane.
Roof monitor: See Monitor.
Roof, steep: A roof that can be made waterproof with shingles.
Roof, thatched: A roof that is covered with bundles of reeds,
grasses, or leaves.
Run of stair: The total horizontal dimension of a stair, mea-
sured from the lowest riser to the highest.
Sash: The portion of a window frame, often movable, that
holds the glass.
Scaffolding: Temporary platforms for the convenience of con-
struction workers.
Scupper: An opening through a parapet or curb for draining
water from a roof.
Sealant: An elastic substance used to close a seam or opening
in the enclosure of a building. Most sealants are injectable
mastics, but some are tapes, gaskets, or expanding foams.
Self-opening roof vent: A roof hatch that opens automatically
du r ing a building fire so as to allow smoke and heat to escape.
Sensible heat: Heat that raises or lowers the temperature of a
substance without changing its phase.
Septic tank: A watertight underground vessel designed to foster
the anaerobic decomposition of sewage and to separate the
decomposed sewage into a precipitate (sludge) and a super-
natant (e f f luen t ).
Service panel: A metal box that contains the c ircu it breakers
for a number of electrical circuits and from which the wiring
for these circuits radiates.

262

Sewage: Wastewater from a bu i ld ing.
Sewerage: A network of underground pipes that collect sewage
and conduct it to a treatment plant.
Shaft: A vertical opening through multiple floors of a building
to house elevators, pipes, ducts, or wires.
Shear: A relative motion, force, or stress of two masses of ma-
terial that are pushed or pulled in opposite directions along
a common plane.
Shear panel: A planar element of structure that resists lateral
loads by means o f fe rees within its plane.
Shelter: Any natural or constructed object that offers pro-
tection from wind, precipitation, sun, and/or extremes of
temperature.
Shelter belt: A swath of trees planted to obstruct the wind.
Shingle: A small, flat piece of material overlapped with similar
pieces on a wall or steep roof in such a way that water will
drain off by gravity before it can penetrate.
Shoring: A temporary compression member erected to support
a wall of an excavation or a newly poured concrete structure
against collapse.
Short circuit: An accidental or inadvertent interconnection of
a hot wire with a neutral wire.
SI units: Systeme Internationale d'unites, a rationalized system
of measurement based on the meter. In order to avoid con-
fusion in linear measurements, the centimeter is not used
in SI.
Siamese connection: A Y-shaped pipe connection at the base
of a bu i ld ing that allows one or two pumper trucks to con-
nect to a building 's standpipe or sprinkler system.
Sick bu i ld ing syndrome: A condition of being uninhabitable
because of poor interior air quality due to molds, mildew,
spores, organic chemicals, sewer gases, combustion prod-
ucts, or other causes.
Sill: The horizontal lower edge of a window or door. The
portion of a building frame that rests on the top of the
foundation.
Simply supported beam: A beam that is supported by hinges
and/or rollers at its ends.
Single-phase electricity: Alternating current that varies in volt-
age as a single sine wave.
Skylight: A window in a roof.
Slab: A horizontal, planar element of concrete, usually rein-
forced or post-tensioned, used most commonly as a floor,
roof, walkway, or roadway.
Slab-on-grade: A concrete slab that rests directly on the
ground.
Slow-burning construction: A heavy timber frame that meets
certain code requirements for m in imum sizes of members.
Sludge: The precipitate of decomposed sewage.
Smokeproof enclosure: An exit stairway that is protected
from smoke by being accessible only by means of a balcony
ventilated to the outdoors or by mechanically forced intro-
duction of fresh air.
Snow fencing: A slatted fencing used to induce dr if t ing of snow
at a distance from a roadway so as to keep it from drifting
onto the roadway.
Solar flux: The flow of radiant energy from the sun.

Solar heating: Using sunlight as a heat source for a bu i ld ing
comfort system.
Solstice, summer or winter: A date when one pole of the earth
is closest to the sun.
Space frame: A three-dimensional truss that spans with two-
way action.
Spalling: The flaking off of chips of material from a surface.
Spandrel: The zone of a wall between the heads of windows on
one floor and the sills of windows on the floor above. Also,
the area of wall between a masonry arch and an imaginary
rectangle that would contain the arch.
Specific heat: The ratio of the un it heat storage capacity of a
material to that of water.
Specifications: Written documents that specify standards of
quality and workmanship for a construction project.
Splay: A divergence in the interior surfaces of the jambs of a
window.
Spline: A strip of material used to keep two ad jacent bu i ld ing
components in alignment.
Spread footing: A block of concrete that distributes the force
from a column or loadbearing wall over an area of soil in a
foundation.
Spring: A naturally occurring flow of water from the earth.
Sprinkler system, automatic: A system of water pipes and
sprinkler heads in which a fusible link opens a head to
extinguish an incipient fire if the temperature at the head
rises substantially above normal levels.
Standing waves: Single-frequency sound that is reinforced by
repeated reflections back and forth between parallel walls
whose distance from one another is a multiple of the wave-
length of the sound.
Standpipe, fire: A vertical pipe that serves fire hose outlets at
each level of a building.
Step ramp: A stair with very broad, sloping treads.
Stiffener: A ridge of material added to a structural element to
increase its resistance to buckling.
Stirrups: Loops of reinforcing steel used to resist diagonal ten-
sion near the ends of concrete beams.
Stock plan: A generic design for a bu i ld ing that is sold in the
form of construction drawings, ready to bu i ld.
Stove, heating: A self-contained heating device, located within
the occupied space of a building, that burns fuel within a
metal enclosure that transfers heat to the surround ing air.
Strain: Change of dimension in a structural material caused by
structural stress.
Stress: Force divided by the cross-sectional area of material
over which it is distributed.
Stress, allowable: A stress at which a structural material may
safely func t ion. Allowable stress is the product of yield stress
and factor of safety.
Stress, yield: The stress at which a material begins to deform
irreversibly.
String course: A projecting horizontal molding on the face of a
building.
Strip footing: A linear spread footing that supports a wall.
Structureborne sound: Sound transmitted through the solid
material of a bu i ld ing rather than through the air.

263

Structure-enclosure jo in t: A jo int that allows d ifferen t ial move-
ment between the frame of a bu i ld ing and the enclosure of
the building.
Strut: A linear compression element in a structure.
Subcontractor: A specialty contractor who works under an
agreement with the general contractor on a bu i ld ing project;
for example, a p lumb ing contractor.
Sump: A pit in a basement floor used to accumulate any water
that may leak into the basement.
Superinsulated, sun-tempered: An approach to energy effi-
ciency in a bu i ld ing that emphasizes high levels of thermal
insulation and airtight construction, coupled with a limited
amount of south-facing glass for direct solar gain.
Surface film: A th in layer of air held by friction on the surface
of a building.
Sustainable building: Building in such a way as to satisfy the
needs of the current generation without compromising the
ability of fu tu re generations to satisfy their needs.
Synclastic: The property of a surface of having the same sense
of curvature, either concave or convex, along both its prin-
cipal axes.
Systeme Internationale d'unites: See SI units.
Tensile: Having to do with stretching of material.
Tensile stress: The intensity of tension in a material, measured
in units o f f e r ee per un it of cross-sectional area.
Tension: A stretching or pulling apart.
Terminal reheat system: An air conditioning system in which
chilled air is circulated through ducts to points of use, where
it is heated with a thermostatically controlled hot water coil
to ad just its temperature.
Termite shield: A sheet metal flange that projects from the
junc t ion between a founda t ion wall and the sill of a build-
ing, over which termites must bu i ld their tubes if they are
to infest a building. The flange makes it easy to detect the
presence of termite tubes.
Terrazzo: A decorative concrete flooring produced by grinding
and polishing a slab made of colored marble chips and
selected colors of fine aggregate and cement.
Terrestrial: Having to do with the earth.
Terrestrial radiation: Thermal radiation from the earth or
among objects on earth.
Thatch: See Roof, thatched.
Thermal break: A layer of low-conductivity material placed be-
tween parts of a metal frame to reduce its conduction of heat.
Thermal bridge: A highly conductive path that transmits
comparatively large amounts of heat through an otherwise
well-insulated bu i ld ing assembly, such as a metal f ram ing
member in an insulated wall.
Thermal capacity: The ability of a material to store heat.
Thermal "feel": Whether a material seems warm or cold when
contacted by the human body.
Thermal resistance: The ability of a material to retard the flow
of heat.
Thermostat: A device that turns another device off and on
depending on whether the amb ient temperature is above or
below a preset temperature.
Tholos: A corbeled dome.

Three-phase electricity: Electric current that is made up of
three overlapping sine waves of alternating current so as to
fu rn ish more constant energy for large electric motors.
Tie: A tensile structural member. A tensile connecting device.
Total energy system: A system in which an on-site generator
driven by an internal combustion engine creates electricity
for a bu i ld ing or complex of bu i ld ings, and the cooling water
from the engine is used to heat water or air.
Transformer: A device for reducing or increasing the voltage of
electric current by means of two coils of a d i f fe r ing number
of turns of wire wrapped around a single magnetic core.
Trap, plumbing: A U-shaped piece of waste pipe that holds a
small quantity of waste water that acts as a seal to prevent
sewer gases from entering the bu i ld ing.
Trap siphoning: The evacuation of the water seal from an
unvented p lumb ing trap.
Tread: A horizontal plane in a stair.
Trombe wall: An east-west wall of concrete, masonry, or con-
tainers of water, placed near a south-facing wall of glass to
absorb and later re-radiate solar heat.
Truss: A structural spann ing device in which loads are trans-
lated into axial forces in a triangulated system of slender
members.
Two-way structural action: Resisting bending in two mu tua l ly
perpendicular directions, as occurs in a concrete two-way
flat plate or two-way flat slab.
Ultraviolet light (UV): Electromagnetic radiation of shorter
wavelengths than violet light.
Underp inn ing: Strengthening the foundations of an existing
bu i ld ing by temporarily supporting the building on jacks
while adding or enlarging foundation components.
Un it air conditioner: A small, self-contained electric-powered
device that utilizes a compression cycle to cool and de-
h um i d i fy room air, usually mounted in a window opening
or in an opening in an exterior wall.
Un it ventilator: A device in an exterior wall that recirculates
room air, exhausting a fraction of it to the outdoors and tak-
ing in a similar fraction of outdoor air, while passing the air
over coils that heat or cool it as needed.
Universal design: An approach to bu i ld ing design that gives
equal access and convenience to all people regardless of
physical handicaps, avoiding separate, special provisions for
the handicapped.
Vacuum breaker: A device in a water supply line that intro-
duces air into the l ine if water pressure is lost, so as to pre-
vent contaminated water from being drawn into the line.
Vapor barrier: See Vapor retarder.
Vapor pressure: The partial pressure exerted by water vapor in
the air.
Vapor retarder: A sheet material or coating that is highly
resistant to the passage of water vapor, used to prevent water
from condensing inside a wall or ceiling. Often called,
incorrectly, a vapor barrier.
Variable air volume system (VAV): A heating and cooling
system for a bu i ld ing that regulates temperature by varying
the amount of conditioned air that is delivered to each space
or zone.

264

Vasomotor regulation: The human body's expansion or contrac-
tion of blood vessels as a means to regulate body temperature.
Vault: A structural device consisting of an arch translated along
an axis perpend icu lar to its plane, or a combination of such
forms.
VAV: See Variable air volume system.
Vent, plumbing: A pipe that opens a system of waste piping to
the air so that it remains always at atmospheric pressure and
avoids trap siphoning.
Ventilation, infiltration: Renewing the air in a building by
means of air passing through cracks and holes in the build-
ing enclosure.
Ventilation, mechanical: Renewing the air in a building with
electrically powered fans that introduce a percentage of out-
door air as they recirculate indoor air.
Ventilation, natural: Renewing the air in a bu i ld ing using only
the forces of wind and/or convection.
Vernal equinox: The day in late March when the north-south
axis of the earth lies perpendicular to the sun's rays. Day and
night have the same length on the vernal and autumnal
equinoxes.
Visual task: The focus of one's attention in a luminous
environment.
Voussoir: A wedge-shaped component of an arch.
Waffle slab: A two-way concrete joist system, which resembles
a waffle when viewed from beneath.
Wainscot: An interior wall facing that starts from the floor or
baseboard but does not extend to the ceiling.
Warm-air heating system: A system that uses air as a medium to
transport heat to the interior of a building.

Wash: A slope on a top surface that causes it to shed water.
Water hammer: A loud knocking sound in water supply pipes
caused by the instantaneous deceleration to zero of water in
the pipes.
Water, hard: Water that is rich in calcium ions.
Water softener: A device that replaces calcium ions in water
with sodium ions.
Weatherstripping: Linear gaskets, pads, metal strips, brushes,
or other devices designed to reduce air leakage through
cracks around doors and windows.
Weep hole: An opening in the exterior of a wall or window
frame that drains to the exterior any water that may accumu-
late within.
Well: A hole drilled or dug into the ground for the purpose of
obtaining water.
Whispering gallery: A concave surface or surfaces that focus
sound in such a way that fa int sounds can be heard over
comparatively long distances.
Wind tunnel: A laboratory device that houses a scale model
and simulates the flow of wind around buildings or other
objects with a small-scale flow of air around the model.
Wired glass: Glass sheet material formed around a wire mesh
that serves to hold the glass together if it should break dur ing
a fire.
Working drawings: The technical drawings from which a
bu i ld ing is built.
Wythe: A vertical layer of a masonry wall that is one brick, one
block, or one stone thick.
Yield point: The stress at which a material begins to distort
permanently.

z65

This page intentionally left blank 

Index

absorptance, thermal, 54
absorption, acoustic, 140,141
absorption cooling, 93
abutment joint, 207
access for disabled persons, 167-69
acoustics, 138-48
concert hall, 142—45
acoustic privacy, 147,148
acoustic tiles, 142
active devices, role of, 253
additions, 250
AFCI, 155
ageing of materials and surfaces, 248-50
air barrier, 70,119-22
air chamber, plumbing, 37
air conditioning systems, 95-98
constant air volume (CAV), 95, 96
dual duct, 95-97
terminal reheat, 95-97
un it ventilator, 97
variable air volume (VAV), 95
air filtration, 107
air-inflated and air-supported structures, 198,199
air movement, control of, 99-108
around buildings, 104,105
outdoor, 99
air pollutants, 99,100,107,108
air pollution, 108
air renewal, 107,108
air temperature, control of, 81-98
air temperature and humidity, passive control of,
81-85
air temperature cycles, daily, 82-85
anthropometries, 158-71
arch, 182-86
architecture, natural order of, 256
atriums, 216, 217

ballasts, lighting, 135
barrel shells, 197

basement, insulation of, 124,125
watertightness, 123-25
beams, 190-97
buckling, 192
deflection, 192
lines of principal stress, 192
bearing wall, 175-77
bioremediation, 45
blueprints, 229, 230
bond, performance, 231
brightness and seeing, 129,130
buckling, 176
builder, 227, 228
building components and function, 252-56
building dimensions, 159-63
building, func t ions of, 25-27, 31, 32
buildings, fitting to people, 158-71
building separation joint, 209, 210
buttress, 184,185

caisson, 202
camber, 193
cantilever, 193
capillary break, 121
cavity wall, 116,117
ceiling height, 162
chimney, 103
clothing, 49-52
cloud gel, 58
coal, 86
color, 128
column, 175-77
combustion air, 86,103
components, functions of, 254, 255
composting, 41
concrete, air-entrained, 116
reinforced, 194-97
slabs, 195,196
structures, 195,196
condensation, moisture, 66-71

267

construction accidents, 235
construction, problems of, 232-37
sequences, 237
tools and equipment, 235
contract, construction, 230, 231
control joints, 205, 206
cooling outdoor spaces, 98
cooling systems, 92-98
absorption cycle, 93
evaporative, 97, 98
compression cycle, 92-94
cooling tower, 92, 96
convectors, 92
Corbel, 197,198
corridors, 163
cost of building, 237, 238
crawl space, 124-26
creep, structural, 204
cross-connection, plumbing, 39
cur ta in wall, 208

day, length of, 4-6
daylighting, 11,131-34
death of a building, 251
decibels, 139
dehumidification, 94, 95
destructive forces on buildings, 239, 240
deterioration, safeguarding against, 240-44
dewatering, 232, 233
dew point, 67-69
disabled, access for, 167-69
domes, 185,186
doors, 103
paneled, 211
doorways, 163
double envelope and double skin buildings,
59
drainage composite, 124
drawings, working, 229, 230
drip, 121

ear, hum an, 139
earth and sun, 3-6
earth-sheltered buildings, 65, 66
EIFS, 122
elastic modulus, 173
electrical distribution in small buildings, 152-55
in large buildings, 155,156
electricity, 149-57
AC and DC, 150,151
arc fau lt circuit interrupter (AFCI), 155
generation and transmission, 149-52
ground fau lt circuit interrupter (GFI), 155
low voltage, 156
on-site generation, 156
receptacle, 154
service panel, 152,153
single-phase and three phase, 151
electric resistance heat, 86
electromagnetic spectrum, 129
elevators and escalators, servicing of, 247
enclosure, building, role of, 252
energy, concentrated, 149-57
energy systems other than electricity, 156,157
environment, human, 15-22
equinoxes, 5
ergonomics, 158-71
exits, 220-23
horizontal, 222, 223
expansion joint, 206, 207
exposed systems in buildings, 237
exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS),

122

factor of safety, 174
fan room, 95
fiber optics, 156
fire, area of refuge, 222, 223
controlling, 213-26
causes of i n j u ry and death, 215
compartmentation, 215-18
curtain boards, 218
effect on strength of steel, 215,216
extinguishment, 219, 220
helping firefighters, 225, 226
horizontal exit, 222, 223
keeping from spreading, 215-18
keeping from starting, 215
loss of life and property, 214
protecting human life from, 220-23
protecting structure from, 223-25
sprinkler systems, 219, 220
in theaters, 217, 218
fire cut beam, 224
fire escape, iron
fire hazard prevention, 243
"fireproof" materials, 223
fire protection of steel, 224, 225
fit of bu i ld ing assemblies, 236
flashings, 
114
floor maintenance, 246
floor, raised access, 156
watertightness, 123-35

folded plate, 197
foundations, 201, 202
frost heaving, 126
fusible link, 218, 219

gas heat, 86, 87
getting a building built, 227-38
GFI, 155
glass, heat-absorbing, 78
heat-reflecting, 78
low-e coating, 56
self-cleaning, 245
wired, 217, 218
glazing, double, 55-57
"green" building, x-xiii
greenhouse effect, 108
ground fau lt in terrup ter, 155
growth and change, designing for, 248,249

health hazards in buildings, 243
hearing and being heard, 138-48
heat, controlling radiation of, 72-80
enters building, leaves bu i ld ing, 81, 82
radiation, conduction, convection, 53-55
heat exchanger, air-to-air, 106,107
regenerative wheel, 106,107
heat pump, 93-94, 97
heating, active, 85-87
fuels, 86, 87
heating systems, heat distribution, 91, 92
hydronic (hot water), 92
steam, 92
warm a ir, 92
high-intensity discharge lamps, 135
human body, cooling of, 17-19
thermal comfort, 15-19
human civilization, environmental requirements
of, 20, 21
human l ife, environmental requirements of, 19, 20
hum id i ty, controlling, 81-98
relative, 66-71

ice lenses, 126
ice dams, 113,114
illumination, 128-37
insulation, thermal, 55-58
intumescent coating, 224
inverse square law, 72
inversion, atmospheric, 7, 8
inversion, structural, 182

keeping a bu i ld ing alive and growing, 239-51
keeping water out, 109-27

labyrinth jo in t, 118
ladders, 161
lamps, 134,135
land and water, climatic effects, 10,11
LEED, xi-xiii
light, color of, 135
incandescent and fluorescent, 128
reflectance of light by colors, 246

light shelf, 133
lighting, ar t if ic ia l, 134-37
daylighting, 131-34
design of, 136,137
lightning rod, 215
loadbearing wall, 175-77
lobby, 163,166,167
low-emissivity (low-e) coating, 56

ma in tenance of bu i ld ings, 244—46
materials of construction, 254
evaluation of, 254
quality assurance, 235, 236
mean rad iant temperature, 73, 74
measurement, English system vs. SI,
169-71
mechanical systems, maintenance of, 247
microclimate, n
modulus of elasticity, 173
mortar jo int profiles, 243
movement in buildings, 204-12
causes, 204, 205
movement in wood, 210-12

night rad iant cooling, 79, 80
night sky radiation, 7, 8
noise, 139,146,147
blocking outdoor, 146,147
masking, 146,147
noisy room, quieting, 147

OSHA, 235
Occupation Safety and Health Act, 235
oil heat, 86
organizing a larger bu i ld ing project, 228—31
outdoor environment, 3-14
outdoor spaces, cooling of, 98

paint, peeling of, 68
panic hardware, 221
parapet, 114, 217, 218
pattern staining, 57
PEC, 119-122
photosynthesis, 12
photovoltaic panels, 150
pile, founda t ion, 202
plan, stock, 227
plate girder, 196
plumbing, cross-connection, 39
fixtures, 38, 39
spaces for, 40
vent, 42,43
post-tensioning, 191,195,196
precipitation, 9,10
precision of buildings, 236
pressure equalization chamber (PEC),
119-22

radiant temperature, manipulating, 74,
75
radiant heat barriers, 77
radiant heating and cooling, 75-77

268

radiators, 92
rafters, 194
rainscreen principle, 118-23
ramps, 164
regenerative wheel, 106,107
reglet, 114
reinforced concrete, 194-97
relative humidity, 81
remodeling, 250
re-use of buildings, 250, 251
reverberation time, 144,145
roof, inverted, 69, 70
monitors, 102,103
overhangs, 112
ventilators, 102,103
roofs, 110-15
edges, 112—18
gutters, 112
ice dams, 113,114
low-slope, 111
shingle, 111,112
snow on, 113,114
steep, 111
thatch, 112
vapor problems, 69, 70

safety, accidents, 167,168
sealant joints, 117,118
seeing, 128-37
sewage disposal, municipal, 44,45
on-site, 45,46
sewage systems in buildings, 42-44
shading, solar, 77
shading and reflecting devices, 132
shafts, enclosure of, 216, 217
shear walls, 199, 200
shelter belt, 104
shelter, concept of, 23-30
shelter, primitive, 23, 24
shoring of excavation, 232, 233
Siamese connection, 226
sick bu i ld ing syndrome, 244
site, role of, 252
SI units, 171
skylights, 102,103,133
slab on grade, concrete, 124-26
"slow-burning" construction, 224
smokeproof enclosure, 226
solar heating, 78, 79, 84, 87-90
active, 89, 90
attached sunspace, 88, 89
backup heat, 90
direct-gain, 88
flat plate collectors, 87
passive, 87-90
trombe wall, 89
solar phenomena, 11,12
solar radiation, effects of, 6, 7
solstices, 4, 5
sound, 139-42
absorption, 140
passage between rooms, 141,142

superinsulated, sun-tempered approach, 89
sustainable building, x-xiii
systeme international d'unites, 171

tensile structures, 177-81
tents, 181
termites, 242
thermal break, 17
thermal bridge, 57
thermal capacity, 58-66, 82-85
thermal comfort, 15-19,49-52
thermal feel 70, 71
thermal mass, 58-66, 82-85
thermal properties of building components,
53-71
Tholos, 197,198
toilet, 43,44
total energy system, 94,150
trap, plumbing, 42 ,43
trombe wall, 89
Trullo, 198
trusses, 186-90

ultraviolet radiation, 12
underground buildings, 65, 66
un it air conditioner, 97
un it ventilator, 106,107
universal design, 169

vacuum breaker, 39
vacuum insulation, 58
vandals and arsonists, 243, 244
vapor barrier, 68-70
vapor pressure, 67-69
vapor retarder, 68-70
vaults, 185,186
vent, plumbing, 42,43
ventilation, 100-108
of combustion products, 103
by convection, 102
by infiltration, 100,101
mechanical, 105-107
natural, 100-103
windows, 101,102
wind-powered, 102,103
voussoirs, 182,183

wainscot, 245
wall, loadbearing, 175-77
wall, functions of, 254, 255
walls, panel, 116-21
wash, 121
waste piping, 42,43
wastes, recycling, 41-48
solid, 46-48
water, climatic effects, 10,11
bottled, 40
distribution w i th in building, 36-38
forces that can move, no
internal sources of, 127
keeping out, 109-27
private supply systems, 35, 36

pressures, 139
reinforcement, 143-45
reinforcement, electronic, 145
resonant response, 140,141
standing waves, 142,143
space frame, 190
specifications, construction, 229—31
sprinkler systems, 219,220
stairs, 163—66
tread and riser dimensions, 164-66
exit, 221,222
standby generating units, 150
steel, fire protection of, 225
stoves, heating, 86
stresses, structural, 173,174
structure-enclosure joint, 208
structures, 172-203
arches, 182-86
beams, 190-97
bracing, 199, 200
buckling, 176
buttresses, 184,185
camber, 193
cantilever, 193
collapse, 200
columns, 175-77
compression and tension, 174
concrete slabs, 195,196
continuous, 193,194
corbel, 197,198
domes, 185,186
elastic modulus, 173
factor of safety, 174
folded plates and barrel shells, 197
foundations, 201, 202
fun icu la r, 180,181
hanging model, 182
invertibility, 187,188
lateral support, 199, 200
loads, 172-74
one-way and two-way, 195
plate girder, 196
pneumatic, 198,199
post-tensioned, 191,195,196
rafters, 194
reinforced concrete, 194-97
rigid frame, 196
rigid joints, 199,200
shear walls, 199,200
space frame, 190
stresses, 173,174
tensile, 177-81
tents, 181
tholos, 197,198
trusses, 186—90
vaults, 185,186
vertical support, 175-77
yield point, 174,177
sump pump, 123
sunlight, 3
sun paths, 4—6
sunshading, 78

269

water, climatic effects (conr.) 
provision of, 33—40 
sources, 33, 34 
transporting to point of use, 34 
treatment of, 34 
water closet, 43,44 
water leaks, 242, 243 
water vapor in buildings, 66—71 

watertightness of masonry, 115,116 
watertightness, theory, 109, no 
walls, 115 
weather, 8-n 
well points, 233 
well, water, 35, 36 
whispering gallery, 143
wind around tall buildings, 104,105 

wind energy, 90
windows, 101,102
func t ions of, 255, 256
orientation, 79
wood decay, 241, 242
World Trade Center collapse, 200, 201

yield point, 174,177

270

