So. . . You Want to
Build a House

This page intentionally left blank 

So. . . You Want to
Build a House

A CompleteWorkbook for Building
YourOwnHome

J. M. Gore
William Null

McGRAW-HILL

New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. Except
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or ditributed in any form
or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 

0-07-149123-6

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-147493-5.

All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked
name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benef it of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the
trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 

McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate train-
ing programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-
4069. 

TERMS OF USE 

This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve
one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may
use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work
may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 

THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS
TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK,
INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted
or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regard-
less of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any informa-
tion accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim
or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 

DOI: 10.1036/0071474935

Professional

Want to learn more?

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.

For more information about this title, click here

Contents

About the Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i x
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . x i

CHAPTER 1

The Startling Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
There Is No Perfect House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

CHAPTER 2

Purchasing the Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

CHAPTER 3

Consult a Realtor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

CHAPTER 4

Meeting with an Architect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1

How Many Copies of the Blueprint Do You Need? . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2

CHAPTER 5

Going to the Bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 5

CHAPTER 6
Guidelines for Building a Remarketable Home . . . . . . . . . 2 1

Build within the Given Market in the Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1
Does the House Design Fit Well with the Other Homes 

in the General Area? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1

v

v i

C O N T E N T S

Does Your House Fit within the Price Range of the Houses 

within an Area and/or Subdivision? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2

Research the General Square Foot Pricing of 

Newly Constructed Houses in an Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 3
Learn the Value of an Upgrade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 4

CHAPTER 7

Hard Costs versus Soft Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 5
Hard-Cost Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 5
Soft Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 7

CHAPTER 8
Learning to Spread Your Budget over the 

Cost of the House . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2
Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2
Lay of the Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 3
House Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 3
Basic Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 5

CHAPTER 9

Getting the Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1

CHAPTER 10

How to Use the Workbook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 5

Sample Preliminary Construction Estimates Worksheets . . . . . . . . . 4 6

Sample Itemized Cost Detail Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 8
Sample Cost Detail Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 6

CHAPTER 11

Creating Your Construction Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 9

CHAPTER 12

What You Can Do to Save Money . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3

CHAPTER 13

Frequently Asked Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 5

C O N T E N T S

v i i

HOMEOWNER’S CONSTRUCTION WORKBOOK . . . . . . . . . . 6 7

Before Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 9
During Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 5
After Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 8
Homeowner Responsibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0 1

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 0 3

This page intentionally left blank 

About the Authors

J. M. GORE is a licensed real estate broker. She owns and operates her
own real estate agency and construction ﬁrm.

WILLIAM NULL has owned and operated his own development and
construction company and has worked as a construction superin-
tendent for major homebuilders in the St. Louis, Missouri, area for
more than 20 years. He has managed the construction of more than
50 homes at a time and has an impeccable record for ﬁnishing
homes on time and on budget.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

i x

This page intentionally left blank 

Introduction

If owning your own home is the “American Dream,” perhaps then
the pinnacle of the American Dream is to build your own house.
A house tailored to not only ﬁt your speciﬁc needs, but one personal-
ized enough to make a statement to the world (or at least the neigh-
borhood) of who you are. Customizing your special place and build-
ing it from the ground is a challenging, rewarding, and extremely
fulﬁlling endeavor to undertake. Many people begin with tremen-
dous plans and expectations only to get so burned by the building
process that they determine to never build again. Our goal is to make
this experience easier and even enjoyable.

Your home is usually the largest ﬁnancial investment you will
ever make. Therefore, you want to make quality decisions that
add value to this investment, not useless and unnecessary costs.
You want to stay within a budget and build the house in a timely
manner. 

Working for more than a decade with people who want to build a
house, we recognize the mistakes and pitfalls commonly encoun-
tered by a would-be builder. The purpose of this book is to help
you logistically and realistically plan and budget well before you
begin, thus giving you a grasp of actual costs for construction and
determining a reliable construction schedule to follow. By using
this book, you will not only be better informed, but also be better

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

x i

x i i

I N T R O D U C T I O N

prepared to handle the unexpected costs that arise so that your
budget doesn’t get out of control. You will also create a construc-
tion schedule so you can get an idea of when your project will be
completed even when you encounter delays. Most people who
want to build a house are shocked to discover the expense of all
the things they want and need to include in the project. They get
discouraged and confused before they even begin. This book will
help you determine costs in advance so that you can make edu-
cated choices and control your budget. It will also help you avoid
the worst feeling—to be near completion of your house and sud-
denly realize you are seriously over budget. You then hate the
entire building experience and the house you have so diligently
worked for.

This book is designed to help you accumulate all of the informa-
tion you will need to successfully build a house with a budget you
decide and design to ﬁt your individual needs. The forms in the
workbook section of this book will help you build an outline for
the construction of your house. You will be able to navigate
through the hard costs of construction, allowing you to choose the
special things you want to be included in the house that will cus-
tomize it to ﬁt your needs, desires, and budget. You will learn to
seek out the information you need to make informed decisions so
that your house is not just a conglomeration of personal stuff, but
a sound ﬁnancial investment for your future. The building process
is stressful. While no book can totally alleviate that stress, the
intention of this book is to relieve a great deal of that stress by
helping you compile information. Being informed, knowing what
to ask, and whom to ask will resolve many of the issues that arise
during the construction process. Good preparation will help you
focus on the end result, allowing you to not only see the “big pic-
ture” but have control over your expenditures and budget.
Knowing you are in control makes the undertaking of a large proj-
ect less stressful, more rewarding, and fun. What seems like a
daunting task at ﬁrst becomes more like a challenge of a jigsaw
puzzle when broken into smaller segments. By using this book as
a useful tool, the construction of a new home will be a fun project.

I N T R O D U C T I O N

x i i i

As you discover how to determine the costs of each aspect in the
building process, you will be in control and that will make this a
rewarding experience. You may ﬁnd that you enjoy this construc-
tion process. So, here’s to building a great house! 

Let’s get started…

This page intentionally left blank 

So. . . You Want to
Build a House

This page intentionally left blank 

1

The Startling Truth

THERE IS NO PERFECT HOUSE

It is one thing to want to build your dream house and to even get to
the stage of building your dream house. You must realize from the
very beginning that no matter what you, your architect or designer,
and your builder do, and no matter how much money you have,
there will be something unanticipated and the house will not be per-
fect. No matter how much you plan and prepare, the house cannot
and will not be perfect. You will save yourself, your realtor, your
architect or designer, and your builder unbelievable stress and dis-
content if you accept this truth before you even start. All houses dif-
fer from theory (the blueprint, speciﬁcations, and plans) to reality.
No one can anticipate the unique situation of an individual house on
a particular property. Even the subdivision house that is built over
and over again has things happen that make it different each time it
is built. Good carpenters and builders can cover up discrepancies
and mistakes and that is what makes them skilled and good at their
trade.

Understand the difference between a customized house and a cus-
tom house. A customized house can be a unique design that you,
your designer, and builder have created; you are going to select
items (perhaps even some custom-built items) to put into the house.
A custom house is the one in which you personally hand select each
piece of wood and everything else used to construct it. If you do not

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

1

2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

like a particular item or something about the house, you have the
time and money to have it torn apart and reconstructed. Most people
say they are having a custom house built, but mean they are having
a customized house built. If you really are having a custom house
built, you must tell your builder in advance because creating an accu-
rate budget for a true custom house can be nearly impossible.

When building a customized house, you can make changes during the
construction process. However, you must keep in mind that 99 percent
of the time, if you make a change, you will be charged for it. This is
true especially if anything has to be rebuilt or moved. Also keep in
mind that some changes you desire may not be able to be made.
Many times homeowners want to change walls and do not realize
that a particular wall they want to move may be a load-bearing wall
or it may affect an entire truss system or something else critical to the
structural integrity of the house. Your builder should be experienced
enough and honest enough to tell you when something is impossi-
ble or something that you will regret having done in the future. You
must also be prepared to accept that even a seemingly minor change
can affect the cost of numerous other items that no one can foresee
when the changes are being made or considered.

Example: Once the framing began on a particular house, the home-
owner wanted to change the dormers from nonworking dormers to
working dormers that acted as skylights in each room. This entailed
a little more labor for the framing crew and a little more 2 × 4 lumber
and materials. 

What was unforeseen: The drywall crew had to add a little more
drywall and a great deal more labor because of the scaffolding now
needed and the new degree of difﬁculty in hanging the drywall. The
electrician then had to do additional wiring because electrical ﬁx-
tures now had to be added. The electrical ﬁxtures had to be special
ordered because of the added 4 ft ceiling height in each dormer and
the light ﬁxtures chosen had bulbs that were very difﬁcult to change.
The windows became an issue because of their location, they were
nearly impossible to clean and maintain. The homeowner ended up
disliking the skylight effect that was created in the rooms involved,
so special window treatments had to be purchased and installed.

T H E S T A R T L I N G T R U T H

3

Because of the location of the dormers, the window treatments had
to have a remote control feature added. Decorating became very dif-
ﬁcult because of the position of the dormers in each room since they
were designed aesthetically to enhance the exterior of the house,
not the interior. The total cost for the dormer change came to be
$20,000. The homeowner was trying to create the perfect house and
in the end hated that aspect of the house.

You will be much more successful and pleased with the end result if
you do not try to build a perfect house. Instead, ﬁnd a plan that
meets your needs within your budget and add a few personal touches.
You will end up with a more perfect house that will serve you well
and resell well.

This page intentionally left blank 

2

Purchasing the Property

I t is better to purchase the property ﬁrst and design the house to
ﬁt within the perimeters of the property lines and setbacks as well as
any engineering requirements speciﬁed by the soil analysis of the
property. When purchasing property as a possible building site, there
are the questions you should ask the seller:

• Is there a recorded plat and survey of the property? If
there is not, this is something you should have done before
you buy the property. Usually this can be negotiated in the
purchase price with the seller as to whether he or she will
incur the entire cost, part of the cost, or none of the cost. It
may be a good bargaining chip for you in making an offer. Get
an estimate on either a full survey or a spot survey. Usually, if
it is a small property or lot, a spot survey will sufﬁce and may
be only a few hundred dollars. If it is a larger piece of acreage,
a full survey may cost thousands of dollars and take weeks to
have done. There have been countless instances when a seller
has sold a piece of property they thought they owned to a
buyer who builds a house on it with no survey or plat. Much
to the chagrin of both parties it is discovered at a later date that
the seller was mistaken and did not own that particular piece
of property, or that the property lines were not where every-
one thought they were and the house is partially or totally on
someone else’s property.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

5

6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

• Has the property been engineered or soil tested as a
building site? If the property is in a subdivision, the devel-
oper should have had an engineer do a soils analysis and com-
paction test to the speciﬁcations of the size and weight of
homes he plans to build. He should be able to provide a letter
from the engineering ﬁrms substantiating that the property
you are buying will support the house you intend to build.
Usually, in a subdivision, the developer will hire an engineer to
test each lot to be sure that it will support the range of houses
being built. An engineer will be able to tell you if the building
site will be suitable for the particular house your want to build.
If you are buying acreage, you should have the speciﬁc building
site engineered for your particular house.
• Be sure to ask about any ﬁll areas in subdivisions or on
acreage. Many times developers have to ﬁll areas or purchase
properties that were used in the past as landﬁlls. The devel-
oper should be willing to disclose if a particular lot has been
ﬁlled and disclose the speciﬁc engineering on that lot. There
have been numerous circumstances where a particular lot had
a sinkhole or had been improperly ﬁlled. Also, the seller of
any acreage should disclose if any part of the property has
been used as a landﬁll or has buried tanks or trash on it. If a
property has been improperly ﬁlled, once the weight of the
house is on it, problems may begin to surface. Part of the
house may settle twelve or more inches or may pull away
from the rest of the house, requiring the entire house to be
removed because of a sinkhole or other issue.
• While asking about possible ﬁll areas, also ask speciﬁ-
cally about any hazardous waste dumps on any piece of
property. It is important to know if any area has ever been
used as a tire, chemical, or any type of dump. Once an issue
is discovered in a subdivision or on a particular piece of prop-
erty, it may be too late to recoup your investment. If you ask
the question in advance and the seller does not disclose this
information, the seller is liable and the buyer has grounds for
ﬁling a lawsuit. However, keep in mind that once lawsuits
begin being ﬁled, the chance of recovery from the seller or a
developer may diminish. Victory in such a suit does not

P U R C H A S I N G T H E P R O P E R T Y

7

ensure monetary recovery if the liable party does not have
funds nor has funds shielded from such judgments.
• Ask about any and all easements and rights-of-way.
When the title company does a title search, all easements
and rights-of-way should be disclosed from a period of the
past 25 to 50 years, but ask anyway. You must know about
utility easements, what restrictions dictate, and exactly where
you can build on a speciﬁc site. Many properties are virtually
unbuildable because of size, setback restraints, and location of
utility easements. You must know if you share any sewer
and/or water rights or well easements on a property. If there
are shared easements on a property, you must be advised of
your responsibilities if repair work or maintenance is required.
You must know about all road and access easements and what
rights others have to cross and use your property as well as
your responsibilities, liabilities, and limitations in this matter. If
your property borders a landlocked property, it may be prone
to a mandatory easement, thereby granting others access
rights to the property.

Do not get discouraged. You do not have to be an engineer or
lawyer to select the right piece of property, but you do need to ask
questions about the property so that you can make an informed
decision about the property.

This page intentionally left blank 

3

Consult a Realtor

A good realtor can be a great asset in ﬁnding a building site, an
architect, and a builder. Realtors are familiar with the area and
should be able to assist in getting all the information you will need
about the property. It is helpful to ﬁnd a realtor who specializes in new
developments or new construction. Realtors can advise you about the
property values in an area and compile a comparable market analysis
from their database about house values in different areas as well.

You should be candid with the realtor regarding your budget. If your
budget is $250,000, a realtor can direct you to areas where you can
get the most value in that price range as well as areas that have
strong sales. Realtors are familiar with the more popular areas of
growth in an area and where housing consistently appreciates well.
Realtors can also advise you about different builders in the area and
where to view their projects and workmanship.

Realtors can also tell you the important features of housing in your
budget range. An example of this: In a particular area several years
ago new houses priced from $215,000 and above were expected to
feature jetted tubs in the master bath while homes less than that
rarely had jetted tubs. Currently, homes priced in the mid-100s fea-
ture jetted tubs as common practice in many areas because of their
popularity and lower cost.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

9

1 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

If you are not purchasing or selling property through realtors and
are just seeking advice and information, it is a common courtesy to
periodically keep in touch and do business with them in the future
if they were helpful. 

4

Meeting with an Architect

I f you are going to have a house designed, you should get
acquainted with an architect or home designer as soon as possible.
You may want to consult with the architect before you begin look-
ing for property. He or she may be able to advise you of areas to
look for property and know of subdivisions or acreage that will suit
your requirements. If you are going to build a 3000 ft2 sprawling
ranch, the lot requirements may be quite different from building a
3000 ft2 two-story house. The architect may be familiar with require-
ments for setbacks and utility easements in certain areas. The archi-
tect may also be familiar with county ordinances and permits
required or can direct you in ﬁnding the information you will need.
He or she will also be able to tell you if the plan must have an archi-
tectural seal for a project. This seal is usually reserved for commer-
cial structures, but some circumstances or communities may require
a seal for your house.

A good architect should be able to help with the budget to a certain
extent. You need to tell him or her what your budget is in the very
beginning. There is a great difference in creating ﬂoor plans and styl-
ization between a $200,000 budget for a 3000 ft2 house compared to
a $300,000 or greater budget for a 3000 ft2 house. Refer to Chap. 8 for
detailed information. Discuss the use of a computer-aided design
(CAD) drawing compared to a real blueprint with your architect. The
CAD may be less expensive if making changes, but some CAD draw-
ings lack structural details your builder may need.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

1 1

1 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

When you hire an architect or a draftsman to design a house, the
house plan becomes your property once it is paid for in full. He can-
not share it with anyone else without your consent. If someone con-
tacts the architect requesting a copy of your plans, the architect can-
not give out a copy without your express written consent.

HOW MANY COPIES OF THE BLUEPRINT DO YOU NEED?

Plan on getting between 10 and 15 copies. Some will be lost, some
destroyed, and some must be kept forever in a safe place. Here is the
breakdown of who gets what, who will return them, and who will not.

If You Are Building with a Builder with His or Her Plans
• You will need one working set for yourself (you will have
more). This set will be your master set to make notes on for
any changes occurring during construction or problems.

Bank copy: The bank or lender will keep a copy on ﬁle.

• A copy should always remain with the home for any future own-
ers (if you receive an approved copy from any municipality issu-
ing permits, this is the best copy to keep for this purpose). Keep
this copy in what will become your permanent construction ﬁle.

If You Are Building with a Builder with Your Plans
• You will need one working set for yourself (you will have
more). This set will be your master set to make notes on for
any changes occurring during construction or problems.

Bank copy: The bank or lender will keep a copy on ﬁle.

• A copy should always remain with the home for any future
owners (if you receive an approved copy from any municipality
issuing permits, this is the best copy to keep for this purpose).
Keep this copy in what will become your permanent construc-
tion ﬁle.
• The builder or project manager will need a minimum of seven
working sets of plans depending upon whether or not they
will be getting bids for the construction.

M E E T I N G W I T H A N A R C H I T E C T

1 3

• Each engineering ﬁrm hired will need a set of plans (soils
analysis, septic, utility, and the like), and the plans may or may
not be returned to you.

If You Are Getting All Bids Yourself

You will need all as listed above, but the seven or more master
sets allotted to the builder will be what you will use for getting
bids as follows:

• One complete set for lumber companies to bid from—this will
be returned to you.
• One complete set for foundation and concrete crews and fram-
ing crew—keep this set in the house once the house is under
roof for general reference by all crews. Be sure to transfer all
notes and changes to this set from your personal master set.
• One partial set of front, back, and each side elevation for each
masonry, siding, exterior cover, and rooﬁng subcontractor.
• Four partial sets of entire ﬂoor plan without elevations for elec-
trician, plumber, heating and air installer, insulation installer,
cabinet company and designer, septic/sewer installer, dry-
wallers, trim carpenters, and ﬂooring company. These four sets
can be rotated to each trade bidding the project. Tell each sub-
contractor who receives a set of plans that you will need the set
for the next subcontractor to bid from and you will likely have
the plans returned to you.

Be sure to ask how long it will take for the subcontractor or vendor
to get the bid to you and how long they will need the blueprints.
Depending on the size of the house and each subcontractor’s work
schedule, you may receive a bid in a few days or several weeks. Use
the blueprint log sheet form (Fig. 4-1) in the Workbook section to
keep track of who has which copy of the blueprint and how long they
have had it so you know where the copies are at all times. When
copies used for bidding are returned, keep them for each trade that
will be doing the job. Any changes made on the master blueprint must
be noted on all partial blueprints being used for bidding or construc-
tion purposes. Blueprints get destroyed and misplaced as a matter of
course, but by keeping a log, you will be less likely to be caught with-
out any sets over the course of construction.

1 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

Vendor or
Subcontractor

Material
or Trade

Blueprint
Page

Date
Out

Date
Returned

Phone
Number

MILLER COUNTY / JOHN

PERMIT

201 555-5512

1 SET

CLEAR IT NOW / MARK

CLEARING

201 555-5512

PLAT

6/1

6/15

CLEAR IT NOW / MARK

EXCAVATION

201 555-5512

FOUNDATION

5/1

5/3

ABC ENGINEERING/JOE

SEPTIC ENGINEER

201 555-5512

PLAT & 1 SET

4/15

4/20

ABC CONCRETE / MIKE

FOUNDATION

201 555-5512

FOUNDATION

4/20

4/23

ABC CONCRETE / MIKE

FLATWORK

201 555-5512

PLAT/FNDTION

4/20

4/23

CUSTOM CONCRETE/JIM

FLATWORK

201 555-5512

PLAT/FNDTION

4/20

4/21

R & R LUMBER / GEORGE

LUMBER

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/1

4/10

R & R LUMBER / GEORGE

WINDOWS

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/1

4/10

ELLISON ROOFING / KEVIN

ROOFING

201 555-5512

1 SET

4/3

4/4

SPECIAL SIDINGS / LARRY

SIDING

201 555-5512

ELEVATIONS

4/5

4/7

BRICKS AND STONES/HAL

MASONRY

201 555-5512

ELEVATIONS

4/5

4/7

MHK CARPENTRY / MEL

MID-AM ELECTRIC / LEROY

FRAMING

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/3

4/4

ELECTRICAL

201 555-5512

ELECTRICAL

4/2

4/5

VITAL PLUMBING / JO

PLUMBING

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/2

4/5

FURNACE MASTERS / RON

HVAC

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/2

4/7

DELUXE CABINETS / BRIAN

CABINETS

201 555-5512

FLOORPLAN

4/10

4/13

JOE'S LANDSCAPES/ JOE

LANDSCAPE

201 555-5512

PLAT/FNDTION

4/15

4/20

S A M P L E

BLUEPRINT LOG SHEET

FIGURE 4-1
Blueprint log sheet.

5

Going to the Bank

I f you approach the bank or lender with all of the preliminary
information in this workbook in hand, they will know you are well
prepared for the venture you are about to embark upon. Each lender
handles new construction loans differently. You should contact sev-
eral lenders in your area to see which one suits you best and which
one meets your ﬁnancing needs.

Some lenders will disburse the funds for construction loans in-house.
You or the builder you choose will take the invoices to the lender.
The lender will review the invoices, possibly inspect the property,
and cut the checks to each subcontractor. The vendors or subcon-
tractors will either pick up the checks directly from the lender and
sign lien waivers at that time, or the checks will be given to you or
the builder and it will be your responsibility to get the lien waivers
signed when the checks are received. Most lenders require subcon-
tractors to sign a lien waiver for each invoice issued to ensure they
have been paid and that there are no outstanding invoices or possible
liens against the property when construction is ﬁnished. If your lender
disburses funds directly, you may save from 1 percent to 2 percent of
total construction cost compared to disbursing through a title com-
pany. You will also have sizable savings because the interest
charged during construction will be for smaller amounts throughout
the entire construction period rather than four or ﬁve large draws
during construction.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

1 5

1 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

Disbursing through a title company is more costly, but the responsibility
of getting signed lien waivers from each vendor and subcontractor is
that of the title company. The lender or title company will advise you
or your builder the allotted number of draws you are allowed to have
during the entire construction period and the construction site will very
likely be inspected before funds are disbursed. If your lender insists on
using a title company, you need to ask how much the title company
will charge and at what point they receive their payment.

In some instances, the fee a title company collects will be taken out of
the construction loan immediately when the loan is ﬁrst set up before
construction is begun. Be sure to allow for this in your budget, as this
can be a sizable amount of money that you were counting on for actu-
al construction costs. Some title companies charge a percentage fee
for each check they issue so their charges are spread over the entire
construction period, and you would not be charged for anything you
paid for with your own funds. This is better for you, so you are not
paying interest during the entire course of construction for services
that have not been totally rendered. You should also ask if there is an
additional charge for any inspections the title company does, how
many inspections they do, and if they inspect for each invoice pre-
sented and check written. Some title companies allow only ﬁve or six
inspections during the course of construction and charge an addition-
al $50 or $100 per inspection above your allotted amount. This can
add thousands of dollars to your cost if construction goes slowly and
more disbursements are needed because of delays.

You must also ask how long it takes for funds to be disbursed once
invoices have been approved and turned in. Some title companies
take weeks to process. This can create quite a problem for you in
dealing with your vendors and subcontractors. Most subcontractors
and vendors require at least a partial payment, if not the entire pay-
ment, upon delivery of goods or once their portion of the job is com-
pleted. Some require payment within ﬁve business days of services ren-
dered. If your title company or lender is slow to pay, this can create
quite a problem with having your vendors or subcontractors return
to ﬁnish their respective jobs or deliver materials.

It is far better for the homeowner to be in total control of funds, dis-
bursements, and lien waivers if you have the time to deal with it.

G O I N G T O T H E B A N K

1 7

Remember that you are the customer and the title company you
choose is up to you. Do some research and ﬁnd one that is most efﬁ-
cient and fast with its services.

Figure 5-1 is a sample of a lien waiver form. Some lenders and title
companies have their own forms. Originals are for the lender and/or
title company. You should keep one copy for your ﬁles. If you have

WAIVER OF LIEN

State of: ___ Missouri

County of:        Miller

To All Whom It May Concern:

Gladville, U.S.A. ___________

Whereas, the undersigned has been employed by:

Mr. and Mrs. Happy Homebuilding Couple

to furnish labor and/or materials for the building known as:

LOT NUMBER:   123 SUBDIVISION:

Happy Acres

ADDRESS: ______456 Blissful Valley Avenue, 

Now, therefore, the undersigned for and in consideration of the sum of 

Seven

  Thousand Five Hundred and no/100 -----------------------  ($7,500.00) dollars and other
good and valuable considerations, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, does
hereby waive and release any and all lien, and claim or right to lien, on said above
described building and real estate under the Statutes of the State of Missouri
relating to Mechanic’s Liens, on account of Labor or Materials, or both, heretofore
furnished by the undersigned for said building and real estate.

In the event the bank check given in payment of the foregoing materials and/or
labor should be returned unpaid because of any fault or neglect of the make of the
check, then this release shall become null and void.

Given under our hands this _______ day of _____________________, 20____.

By: ____________________________________

(Signature)

Title: __________________________________

Company: ________________________________________

INVOICE NUMBER:  _______________     CHECK NUMBER: ________________

FIGURE 5-1
Sample lien waiver.

1 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

DISBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM

LOT NUMBER: 123

SUBDIVISION: HAPPY HOLLOW ACRES

HOMEOWNER/BORROWER: MR. AND MRS. HAPPY HOMEOWNER                                      

SUBCONTRACTOR OR
VENDOR

BIG L LUMBER COMPANY

FRAMERS ON THE GO

ON TOP ROOFING

LIEN
WAIVER

Y/N

Y

Y

Y

DESCRIPTION
OR SERVICES
RENDERED

DETAIL
ITEM
NUMBER

CHECK
NUMBER
ISSUED

PAYMENT
AMOUNT

LUMBER

FRAMING/CARPENTRY
Fill-in services rendered
SHINGLES / LABOR
with accompanying
invoice.

14

17

18

1201

1202
1203

18,673.49

8,500.00

4,250.00

The item number from the
“Actual Cost Detail” sheet
makes it easier to keep track
of what is being charged for.

Check number
issued for
the
submitted
invoices.

The total
amount of
the check
issued for all
invoices
submitted by
a vendor or
subcontractor.

The vendor or
subcontractor with
an invoice for
payment.

This will be an easy way to
keep track of whether a lien
waiver has been created to
accompany the check when
paying an invoice.

S A M P L E

The total of submitted
invoices with a particular
disbursement request.
.

NOTE:

TOTAL PAYOUT

$ 31,423.49

We, the undersigned certify that this disbursement request for payout is based on work in progress and/or materials furnished for
the building project as identified above.

The total amount requested from the lender.
This should match the above total payout.

Signatures of homeowner or
borrower verifying accuracy
of invoices.

TOTAL REQUESTED FROM LENDER

$ 31,423.49

Keep track of how many 
draws are requested and the 
invoices attached to 
particular draws.

DRAW NUMBER: 

         THREE      

FIGURE 5-2
Sample disbursement request.

SIGNED: Mr and Mrs. Happy Homeowner
HOMEOWNER / BORROWER

DATE:

2/2/06

SIGNED: John Construction
PROJECT MANAGER
Signature of contractor or project manager verifying invoices
accuracy and completion of services rendered.

DATE:

2/2/06

G O I N G T O T H E B A N K

1 9

questions regarding lien waivers and their value, you should consult
a real estate attorney in your area.

Figure 5-2 shows a sample of a disbursement request form which
can be turned in to a lender or title company to request payment for
invoices. You would ﬁll out whom the invoice is from, if you have a
lien waiver to give with the check to be issued, the description of
materials supplied or services rendered, and the item number from
the actual cost detail form (explained in Chap. 10). You would also
record the check number issued for the invoice and the total pay-
ment amount. There may be circumstances when you will receive
more than one invoice from a vendor and turn several in at one time,
hence only one payment amount per vendor or subcontractor. The
total payout area is the total of all payments for the particular dis-
bursement and should be equal to the “total requested from lender”
unless the homeowner is adding his or her own funds to the dis-
bursement. The form will need to be signed by the homeowner and
project supervisor indicating the work has been completed or mate-
rials ordered or received. The “draw number” area is to keep track
of which invoices are being attached to a particular draw request.
This is an easy way to organize and keep track of large amounts of
money being paid for several services.

This page intentionally left blank 

6

Guidelines for Building
a Remarketable Home

B e honest and objective about the marketability of your home
in the future. You may think that this is the last or only home you will
ever live in, but 99 percent of the time it will not be, so you must
choose wisely in all areas.

BUILD WITHIN THE GIVEN MARKET IN THE AREA 

To put it simply, do not overbuild or underbuild the home in the
area you choose. Building an expensive, luxury house in the country
ﬁfty miles from conveniences may be your absolute dream and desire.
However, you must consider the consequences of doing this. If 95
percent of other houses in the area are valued at a fraction of the cost
of the house you build, you will narrow your market to not only some-
one who has the means to purchase such a house, but also to someone
with the same taste, style, and design as you. You may create a situation
where you will either have the house on the market for a lengthy period
of time or be forced to take well below not only market value but also
what you have invested in order to ﬁnd a potential buyer.

DOES THE HOUSE DESIGN FIT WELL WITH THE OTHER 
HOMES IN THE GENERAL AREA? 

Of course, if you have the funds and whim, you can build any style
of house anywhere you desire. Take into consideration the style of

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

2 1

2 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

homes in the surrounding area, whether in a subdivision or a rural
area. Most builders controlling the development of a subdivision will
either approve the house plan you have submitted or a subdivision/
homeowner’s association will approve the plan. In some circum-
stances, you will have the latitude to build whatever you want.
While you want your house to be special and unique, you also want
it to complement the area. Building a traditional Victorian style two-
story house in a subdivision of contemporary ranches could be quite
a mistake. While your house may be comparable cost wise, it may
be very difﬁcult to market to prospective buyers. 

Generally speaking, home buyers who love a particular style of house
will make their selections in subdivisions or areas where that particular
style is prevalent. Also, having a very different style house in a subdivi-
sion may affect the sale of other houses in close proximity to that house.
Not only may some potential buyers not care to own a Victorian-style
two-story, but they may not want to look at it every day either. 

An example of this happened in several subdivision developments
during the seventies. Rustic-style houses were very popular with the
dark colored brick and dark brown wood-trim exteriors. In two dif-
ferent subdivisions in two towns about 25 miles apart nearly all of the
houses were dark brick rustic ranch style. In each subdivision, the
planning committee approved the construction of very contemporary
three-story Masonite-sided houses. While the homeowners of each of
these houses loved what they had built, when the houses went on the
market, it became very difﬁcult to sell them. Each took several years
to sell and many marketing tactics were used to try to sell the houses.
Each house was painted several times trying to ﬁnd the “magic” color
to appeal to a buyer. Eventually each house did sell, but for more than
$25,000 below the actual market value because of the unusual design
for the area. The houses on either side of each of these houses also
suffered in resale because they were next door to the boxcar houses.

DOES YOUR HOUSE FIT WITHIN THE PRICE RANGE OF THE HOUSES
WITHIN AN AREA AND/OR SUBDIVISION? 

Building the biggest and most expensive house on the block or even
in a general area of houses does not mean that you will reap a bigger
harvest when it comes time to sell; nor does building the smallest and

G U I D E L I N E S F O R B U I L D I N G A R E M A R K E T A B L E H O M E

2 3

least expensive in a subdivision or area. It is better to do a little
research and try to be in a price range of 3 to 5 percent of the aver-
age priced house in an area.

Two cases in point: 

1. A homeowner loved a particular subdivision where the low-
end 1800 ft2 houses appraised for $165,000 and the high-end
2200 ft2 houses appraised for $185,000. The homeowner built
a 4350 ft2 house with numerous upgraded features including a
$25,000 landscape package, ceramic tile ﬂooring, and solid
cherry wood cabinetry, which none of the other houses had.
The construction cost was $350,000. Because of the appraised
value of all of the other houses in the subdivision and general
area, this house appraised for $275,000. Needless to say, nei-
ther the homeowner nor the lenders were happy that the
house could not appraise for the construction cost not to men-
tion the possibility of having any equity available.

2. Another homeowner loved a subdivision of houses ranging
in size from 2600 to 3600 ft2 and ranging in price from
$185,000 to $220,000. The homeowner chose to build a
1650 ft2 ranch in the midst of these much larger houses. His
appraisal did not increase because of the other house values,
but his real estate taxes increased because of the method
used to calculate and add value to lower-end houses based
on more valuable houses in the area. The homeowners’ little
house, although very nice, looked quite out of place com-
pared to the others on the street.

When selling a house under the above circumstances, more is
involved than just the aesthetic appeal of an area. The appraisal, or
lack thereof, affects possible buyers who are seeking 80 percent to
90 percent ﬁnancing.

RESEARCH THE GENERAL SQUARE FOOT PRICING 
OF NEWLY CONSTRUCTED HOUSES IN AN AREA 

Markets vary greatly across the country. In some areas, a new house
cannot even be constructed for $120/ft2, while in other areas $120/ft2

2 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

would be considered high-end. Seek out display houses in the area
and calculate the selling square foot price for new construction. Be
sure to take into consideration the variables that affect an area such
as lake frontage, view, location, and so forth. 

Most people today want more square footage for the money invested.
The newer open ﬂoor plans can give one the feeling of greater space
and still be economical. Contact local lenders and ask what the cur-
rent square foot lending rate is for an area. For example, some
lenders will lend at $75/ft2 for ﬁnished living space and $35/ft2 for
unﬁnished storage space such as in a basement. This unﬁnished
space may be converted to ﬁnished space in the future, adding great
value to the home or greater marketability, because it can be priced
lower with the possibility of increasing value by ﬁnishing the space
in the future. 

It is best to talk to lenders and even real estate agents in an area before
getting started so you can begin with a realistic plan and budget.

LEARN THE VALUE OF AN UPGRADE

What will the added expense of an upgrade do for the value of the
house? A prime example is insulation. In some areas, blown cellu-
lose insulation is overall only a few hundred dollars more than bat
insulation. The savings on energy bills throughout the lifetime of the
house would be thousands of dollars. Therefore, the added value is
great and a great sales point as well. This would be considered a
value-added-cost because it pays for itself over the course of time
and will always hold its value. 

On the other hand, upgrading to custom cabinetry for a moderately
priced house may not be the wisest of decisions. While aesthetically
and emotionally satisfying to one individual, this item does not pay
for itself and may not hold an intrinsic value to a potential buyer in
the future. 

7

Hard Costs versus 
Soft Costs

D ividing the cost of construction into hard costs and soft costs is
very important when creating a budget.

Hard costs are the costs of whatever is needed structurally to con-
struct the house. These items cannot be skimped on but can be
added to in order to add more value or strength to a house.

HARD-COST ITEMS

• Excavation and clearing of property and backﬁll.
• Foundation—footings, wall structure, steel, drainage system,
and waterprooﬁng. Special effects, such as chipped or raked
exposed walls, are extra.
• Concrete ﬂatwork—usually basic driveway, patio, and side-
walk is concrete; however, extra wide, special effects and spe-
cial materials and designs, such as exposed aggregate and
stamped designs, are extra.
• Lumber, nails, adhesives, subﬂooring, and all framing materi-
als needed for the basic structure.
• Windows—upgrading windows e-factor, styles of windows,
casement windows versus carefree versus double-hung, and

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

2 5

2 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

the like are upgrades to be considered, as well as whether
windows are wood, vinyl clad, aluminum paned, and double
or triple glass.
• Note: Tempered-glass windows are mandatory for all win-
dows within 18 in of the ﬂoor and all sliding glass doors must
be tempered glass. Also, consider adding the expense of
shatter-resistant windows near the fairways of golf courses—
this can become mandatory in certain circumstances.
• Insulation—consideration must be made whether the savings
of using bat insulation outweigh the cost of blown cellulose
insulation compared to future energy bill savings. 
• Basic plumbing and electrical wiring (this is discussed in detail
in the section “Soft Costs”).
• Rooﬁng materials—15 lb felt paper versus 30 lb felt paper
must be considered as well as 3-tab asphalt shingles versus
architectural shingles versus more expensive shingles. Check
the rooﬁng material warranty—some manufacturers sell the
same product for 25- to 30-year shingles with the only differ-
ence being a longer paper warranty for 30-year shingles. The
40-year shingle adds considerable value to the cost ratio of a
house, but in basic construction any rooﬁng system beyond a
30-year architectural shingle would fall into the soft-cost cate-
gory because of added material and labor expense.
• Exterior ﬁnish—exterior ﬁnish, while vital to the house, is con-
sidered in the soft-cost category because of the numerous
products available.
• Drywall—basic drywall is a hard cost, but different texturizing
methods and special corners such as bullnose as well as intri-
cate designs become a soft cost.
• Painting—basic painting is a hard cost. The most practiced
method today is to paint all walls in a house, including the
ceiling, one basic color. Anything beyond the basic paint on
the wall, such as some of the new paint techniques involving
customization and a painter familiar with these applications
and the time required to create them would be a soft cost.

H A R D C O S T S V E R S U S S O F T C O S T S

2 7

• Millwork—a basic allotment must be calculated in the cost of
a house and is considered a hard cost. Extra wide base,
upgraded doors, and fancy moldings are a soft cost.
• Landscaping—a basic allotment for ﬁnal grading, seeding a
lawn, and planting a few shrubs is a hard cost. Intricate land-
scaping has become very popular and must be considered a
soft cost.
• Construction cleanup—the fact of the matter is that the job site
must be kept clean. Everyone including the subcontractors for
each trade as well as the homeowner wants the job site to be
clean; however, this is an area most seem to be reluctant to
allot enough funds for. It is a hard cost although it ﬂuctuates
depending on how each subcontractor cleans up after himself
and how much waste is generated throughout the project. It is
important to remember that each trade should be given the
common courtesy and professionalism to start their work on a
clean job site. This allows the subcontractors to perform to the
best of their ability, correctly and efﬁciently. A clean job site will
save the homeowner, and the subcontractors, money as well.

SOFT COSTS

Soft costs are the demons. They are all the great things you want and
even if you don’t have the budget, you may go crazy and get them.
They are a little bit here and a little bit there that add up to thousands
of dollars when the last nail is hammered, the door is closed, and the
house and its mortgage is yours. Some soft costs have a great value
to cost ratio, but most of them are your great taste. The manager of
a great cabinet store is perhaps the most honest of anyone when she
tells potential customers, “You are already overbudget when you
walk through that door.” Be prepared to sacriﬁce some things in
order to have others. It is the albatross of soft costs.

Soft-cost items include, but are not limited to

• Exterior ﬁnish—part of this involves the aesthetic and general
look of the house. Some of it may be determined by subdivi-
sion restrictions and rules. Stone, masonry, exterior insulation

2 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

and ﬁnish system (EIFS), and stucco products add a great deal
of value as well as cost to the house, but these products usu-
ally outlast their initial cost, so the cost-to-value ratio is good.
Siding can be a less expensive alternative, but be advised that
cheap siding will look cheap just a few months after it is
installed. Choosing an exterior siding product that requires
maintenance and/or painting may affect the marketability of
the house in the future. The rule-of-thumb is to spend as much
as the budget will allow for the exterior of the house, but be
sure to keep it within the realm of the other houses in the area.
Although a brick and stone house has tremendous value, in a
subdivision of all vinyl-sided houses, it may not be able to
bring its full price potential.
• Plumbing ﬁxtures—talk to your plumber. A plumber will tell
you what is popular and will last longer. Choose your ﬁnish
wisely and stay consistent in each room (don’t mix brass
faucets with chrome door hinges). Be sure your house war-
rants very expensive ﬁxtures because plumbing ﬁxtures add
little to an appraisal; but also know that cheap plumbing ﬁx-
tures not only do not last, but are also easy for a potential
homebuyer to spot as a negative about a house.
• Electrical ﬁxtures—the rule-of-thumb is to choose more expen-
sive ﬁxtures in rooms that are used the most. Do not skimp on
the exterior ﬁxtures as they will show wear and tear ﬁrst.
• Cabinetry—the number one place to go way overbudget.
Good cabinets are nice, and great cabinets are great, but do
not necessarily add a good value compared to cost ratio. Be
sure to consider the structure of the box rather than just the
door design. An expensive, poorly constructed cabinet is
worthless and will fall apart in short order during normal liv-
ing conditions.
• Millwork and trim—standard is 31/2-in base and 3-in door cas-
ing. If you choose a base that is more than 41/4 in wide, you
must be sure to tell the workers who are doing the ductwork,
so they install the cold air returns and registers at the right
height. The most expensive, solid wood doors may not always

H A R D C O S T S V E R S U S S O F T C O S T S

2 9

be the most desirable if you live in a high-humidity area
because the doors will swell. Be sure to ask before you buy.
• Floor coverings—there is no wrong answer because they can
be replaced and give your house a facelift a few years down
the road. Floor coverings is the area that is usually the one
where the axe falls when cutting the budget because of the
ease of replacing less expensive materials in the future with
something more desirable.
• The above items are discussed in more detail in Chap. 8.

This page intentionally left blank 

8

Learning to Spread 
Your Budget over the 
Cost of the House

T he key to spending wisely and getting the most into and out
of your house is in learning how to spread your budget as evenly
as possible over the entire expenditure of the house while also
allowing you to have those things you really want. The rule: Do
not overspend in any one given ar ea. Repeat. Do not overspend
in any one given ar ea. Every potential homeowner who is plan-
ning on building has an idea of what his or her budget is. It is
unfair and even unethical to approach a builder, realtor, or lender
and not be totally candid about this because everyone will most
certainly know what the budget really is when the construction is
complete. 

Your responsibility is to determine how to divide your available
funds to best serve you and give you the most value for your
investment. You must either begin with the land you like or the
plan you like. This is even the case if you are choosing one of sev-
eral ﬂoor plans in a subdivision. Choose the land or choose the
plan. If you are lucky, your favorite land and plan will be meant for
each other.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

3 1

3 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

LAND

Whether it is a lot in a subdivision or just a vacant land, you must
decide what you are going to spend for and ﬁnd its true value. You
will pay more for a developed piece of property. However, the sav-
ings incurred by not having to deal with the expenses and issues
associated with running utilities as well as the difﬁculties associated
with developing raw land are usually well worth the cost of a devel-
oped site. Most lenders want the cost of the constructed improve-
ment to be a minimum of 21/2 to 3 times the cost of the property.
Therefore, if you spend $100,000 on the parcel of property, the cost
of the construction of the house should be close to $300,000. This is
the best utilization of the cost-to-value ratio of the land. Building a
$100,000 house on such a property would not increase the ultimate
value of the property and may actually decrease its value and that of
surrounding property.

Consider the property and how excavatable it is. If it is a sheer cliff,
is it practical to build on it? What is the composition of the soil? Is it
dirt, rock, or sand? Are there numerous trees and how big are they?
How much money will have to be allotted for land clearing? Can the
brush be burned or must it be hauled away? Will the excavation
costs so exceed the cost/value of the house that it will be impossible
to build a house worth the excavation costs? Can the property be exca-
vated and is there a local subcontractor with the skill to do it? If the
property has a great deal of rock, can the cost of excavation be deter-
mined prior to the work being done, or will it be a time/equipment
cost? What type of equipment will be needed for excavation and is
it available in the area? Will the cost of excavation deplete your
budget too much to substantiate the cost of the balance of the
house? An experienced builder, developer, or excavator can answer
these questions, and many more that may arise.

UTILITIES

Are the utilities already on the property? If not, you must determine
this aspect of developing the land and budget for it. If the property
already has all or some of the utilities, you must know what the var-
ious costs are to tap into the existing system and if you are allowed
to tap into the system. In some circumstances, the utilities may have

L E A R N I N G T O S P R E A D Y O U R B U D G E T O V E R T H E C O S T O F T H E H O U S E

3 3

been run in an area, but the cost to tap on is so extreme that there is
no beneﬁt to do so.

Example: A developer paid to run the electric, water, and natural
gas lines to a subdivision he was developing. The cost of this was
defrayed into each of the lots of the property the developer owned.
The properties that bordered his property could now have access to
utilities that were previously not available, such as natural gas; how-
ever, in order to tap into this new system, each property owner had
to reimburse the developer for his expense to run the utility to that
point. The property owners also had to pay to run the gas line from
their houses to the junction in the street. The initial cost of this for
the property owner was in excess of $25,000. It was more econom-
ical for the property owner to keep a propane tank. 

LAY OF THE LAND

How does the lay of the land affect the design of the house? Will there
be a full basement, partial basement, crawl space, slab, or combination
of these things? If there is a basement, will it be a walk-out or in-
ground? Is it customary for the basement to have insulated walls in the
area where the house is being built? How does the lay of the land
determine the height of the basement walls? What is the trend in the
area for the wall height? Eight-foot basement walls were common until
more recent designs incorporated nine-foot and greater basement
walls. Lots with a steep terrain can allow the concrete walls to be bench-
stepped so that most of the wall is framed, which saves a great deal in
foundation expense. Depending upon the area, concrete can be more
expensive for materials and labor compared to lumber, framing, siding,
and interior ﬁnishing, so this can be a huge budget factor. Will the ele-
vation of the lot increase the labor cost because of degree of difﬁculty
and/or special equipment needed for excavation or construction? Will
the location of the property add costs to the project because of deliv-
ery fees? Over the course of construction, additional fees can add thou-
sands of unanticipated dollars to the cost of a project. 

HOUSE DESIGN

When approaching an architect, draftsperson, or builder, you should
be honest about your budget. These people are professional and if

3 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

you are not honest about how much money you really have and
want to spend, they cannot serve you well. Most designers or
builders will know immediately if your budget is realistic as soon as
you start telling them what you want and how much you plan to
spend. It is unfair and unrealistic to approach a builder and ask,
“How much does it cost per square foot to build a house?” It is one
thing to ask a lender what they lend per square foot for general res-
idential construction, but the builder needs information. A good
analogy would be to ask someone how much it costs to go to a gro-
cery store and ﬁll a cart with products. There is no way to give a
price without having the information of all the contents of the cart.
The builder must know everything about the house you want in
order to give a fair price and help with your budgetary needs.

As discussed in the previous chapter, in general hard costs will
change very little while soft costs are more variable and controllable.
Keep in mind when designing a house or choosing a ﬂoor plan that
the following items add to the overall cost of construction:

• Roof pitch and number of gables as well as roof design.
The steeper the pitch of the roof is and the more gables the
roof has makes the house more expensive. A hip roof is much
more expensive than a simple gable roof.
• Offsets and corners throughout the house. In general,
every corner adds $2000 to the cost of construction. This
amount varies depending upon the exterior materials used.
• Location of plumbing throughout the house. The more
centrally located bathrooms and kitchens are to each other,
the more economical plumbing costs will be. Also keep in
mind that all plumbing walls should be built with 2 × 6 studs
rather than 2 × 4 studs. This makes the plumbing runs easier
on the plumber and allows for additional needed insulation
on exterior walls.
• Special electrical wiring. Television, cable, phone jack out-
lets, recessed can lighting, indirect lighting above or below
cabinets, and lighting offsets in ceiling coffers, as well as
wiring for complicated audio and entertainment systems add
to the cost of construction very quickly.

L E A R N I N G T O S P R E A D Y O U R B U D G E T O V E R T H E C O S T O F T H E H O U S E

3 5

• Octagon or odd-shaped rooms and bay windows. These
items add extra cost for trusses, lumber, rooﬁng material,
labor, windows, ﬂooring, drywall, and the like.
• Decks and patios. When considering wood decks, take into
account not only materials and labor for construction, but also
annual maintenance for waterprooﬁng and staining.
• House setbacks. The setback of the house from the street
affects utility runs, concrete for driveway, and landscape costs.
• Vaulted ceilings and ceiling heights. Vaulted ceilings add
cost for trusses, drywall, painting, and ceiling ﬁxtures. General
ceiling height adds cost in framing, lumber, drywall, painting,
and ceiling ﬁxtures.
• Windows. The number, shape, size, and quality of windows
must be carefully considered in the budget. Of course, if one
of the property features is a great view, the value of numerous
windows will offset the cost.

These are all items that add some value to the house depending on
qualities of the building site, but you must determine if the item is a
cost or value to the overall of the house.

Once you settle on a house design, you are able to calculate the hard
costs to build the house. The soft costs are where most people get
into trouble with their budget as they have a million-dollar taste and
a minimal budget. The soft costs are where you, the homeowner,
have the most control and must decide where to go overbudget a little
or where to cut back a little in order to add something special and
unique to the house. This is where your time is well spent doing as
much homework as possible and familiarizing yourself with the
costs and values of things like lighting ﬁxtures, plumbing ﬁxtures,
cabinetry, and so on.

BASIC CONSIDERATIONS

• Plumbing ﬁxtures. It is better to choose a high-quality stan-
dard ﬁxture than a cheaper, fancier version. Beware of plumb-
ing ﬁxtures with plastic parts as they do not stand up to the

3 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

normal wear and tear of use. Also, most plumbers will not
warrant either ﬁxtures they do not supply or that have plastic
interior parts. If you do not have the budget for an upgraded ﬁx-
ture supplied by the plumber, do not waste your money on the
“cheap” upgrade because it will cost you more in the long run.
Choose your ﬁxtures before construction begins and tell your
builder what ﬁxtures you have chosen. Many of the upgraded
ﬁxtures must have certain parts installed during the rough-in
phase of plumbing or special framing may be required. Also,
keep some consistency throughout the house with ﬁxtures cho-
sen. Every bathroom does not have to be the same style or ﬁn-
ish, but mixing chrome and antique bronze in a room usually
doesn’t work well. One particular room may warrant a nice
upgrade such as the kitchen or master bath. A house valued at
$250,000 or less does not necessarily warrant upgrading a
powder room with a freestanding sink with an in-wall faucet
ﬁxture priced at more than $3000, whereas a house valued in
the $800,000 range may require this type of upgrade. Will a
future buyer realize the value of a $1200 stainless sink over a
$200 one? Does the house warrant marble tubs and showers in
every bathroom, or just the master bath? Did the builder cut
costs by installing acrylic tubs and showers instead of marble
in a high-end house where all marble is expected? Is it obvi-
ous that one area or feature of the house has been overspent
on and looks out of place?
• Electrical ﬁxtures. Electrical ﬁxtures can be chosen once
construction has begun, but as always, it is better to select
early if there is going to be a special ﬁxture or lighting feature
and advise the builder of this. The framing crew and electri-
cian will need to know if anything has to be added structurally
or wired specially for the ﬁxture. It is better to begin with a
basic budget of $1000 per $100,000 cost of house and add to
or subtract according to the budget. This gives you a starting
point. Be advised that you will probably go overbudget in this
area, but how much is up to you. Break your budget down
into speciﬁc rooms and try to be equally extravagant or frugal
in each room. If you are going to be lavish with plumbing ﬁx-
tures in the master bath, don’t install a $15 light ﬁxture

L E A R N I N G T O S P R E A D Y O U R B U D G E T O V E R T H E C O S T O F T H E H O U S E

3 7

because it will be obvious that the lights received the budget
axe. Rule-of-thumb is if you upgrade the plumbing ﬁxtures,
upgrade the light ﬁxtures, ﬂooring, and towel bars as well.
Even an untrained eye can tell that a bathroom with a marble,
jetted-tub, cheap plumbing ﬁxtures, expensive lighting ﬁx-
tures, and plastic towel bars does not look right. Keep a room
consistent.
• Cabinetry. Variety is as vast as the taste of each individual. If
you decide that you must have the $35,000 solid cherry-wood
cabinets, realize that a future potential homebuyer may not
have the same value system and may not think the price of the
house warrants such an expensive item. Expensive cabinetry
does not necessarily add as much value to an appraisal as
other items and one must realize that the cost of expensive
cabinets may be only for the pleasure of the individual. Be
sure to talk to the cabinet sales person about features that are
important to you and ﬁnd out if some things like inset doors
are practical in your area. Sometimes high-humidity condi-
tions in an area cause wood to expand, which affects the abil-
ity of the doors to close properly.
• Countertops. Be wise about the countertop material you
choose. The new granite and solid surface materials are won-
derful, but can be 6 to 7 times more expensive than laminate
tops. With some of the newer laminate ﬁnishes that look like
granite, you may be able to have the look without the added
expense. If you do decide on an expensive countertop sur-
face, be sure to upgrade the cabinets to properly complement
the tops. Even an inexperienced person can see the mismatch of
an expensive countertop installed on a cheap cabinet. Also keep
in mind that the cheap cabinet will not last as long as the expen-
sive countertop and may need to be replaced before the coun-
tertop. Also keep in mind that if you plan to live in the house for
more than 5 years, you may enjoy giving the house a “facelift”
with new cabinetry in the future. Don’t forget to allow for the
cabinet knobs and pulls in the budget. This is a commonly for-
gotten or underbudgeted area. Knobs can range in price from
about $1 to well over $100 each. If you consider that you may

3 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

have 30 to 60 or more knobs to purchase, the cost adds up
quickly.
• Flooring. There is an abundant selection to choose from.
Flooring is an area where you can cut costs, if you think that
several years in the future it may be something you want to
replace. It is easy to replace vinyl linoleum and carpet which
can be the least expensive products to choose. Ceramic tile
and hardwood products that last longer are more difﬁcult to
replace and cost more. There are less expensive ceramic tiles
available, but keep in mind that they do not stand up to the
abuse more expensive tiles can withstand. Upgrading ﬂooring
with tile and hardwood does help increase the appraisal value
of the house, but choosing too expensive a product may not
add enough value if the majority of the houses in your area
have the less expensive ﬂoor coverings. If you have small chil-
dren, you may want to consider choosing a less expensive
grade of carpet and plan to replace it in a few years when
there is less abusive trafﬁc on it. Also consider that you may be
ready for your house to undergo a change or renewal in a few
years because you will become bored with your original selec-
tions and will want to keep with new trends.
• Millwork and trim. This is an area where extra expense can
add up quickly. When selecting trim, common base is 31/2 in,
door casements are 3 in, and most interior doors are split-jamb
and prehung. Usually, trim throughout the house is painted
white or stained, although with the correct decorating theme,
trim can be painted using a contrasting color in one or all
rooms. Upgrading to preﬁnished base and doors may save
enough in paint and labor to justify the added cost. Keep in
mind that by upgrading to a wider base you should also
upgrade the door casements to a wider and matching base.
Once the decision has been made to change to the wider case-
ments, the split-jamb doors with casing must be changed to
ﬂat-jamb doors without casing and the door casing will have
to be custom-cut which will increase trim carpentry labor
costs. This must be discussed in advance with the trim car-
penter as this will affect his or her charges greatly.

L E A R N I N G T O S P R E A D Y O U R B U D G E T O V E R T H E C O S T O F T H E H O U S E

3 9

Example: A trim carpenter had been given a blueprint and bid the
trim-out of a house based on installing split-jamb doors with case-
ments and running 31/2-in base. He bid the job before the house was
started. When the homeowners went to select the style of interior
door for the house, they decided to buy 51/4-in fancy base and
matching casing all unﬁnished so that they could have it custom
stained. They were shocked to ﬁnd that the trim carpenter was going
to charge hundreds of dollars more. He now had to custom-cut the
door casements for 29 doors (times two sides is 58 door casements).
He also had to do more tedious work to properly install the fancy,
wider base because he had to custom-cut around cold air returns, and
several windows that were close to the ﬂoor. He did do the job, but
what had originally been projected as a ﬁve-day job turned into a
three-and-a-half-week job.

The reason for this chapter has been to enlighten you and try to
make you look at the broader picture. You must be as objective as
possible and try to see how your selections will add value or cost to
your house and whether those choices will be proﬁtable or costly to
you in the long run and in the resale value of your house. By spread-
ing the costs evenly throughout your house, you will have a house
that should appreciate well in the real estate market. By limiting the
upgrades in one or two rooms, you will be able to stay within your
budget while enjoying your home as long as you are there. 

This page intentionally left blank 

9

Getting the Estimates

O nce you have purchased the property and the house plan is
ﬁnalized, it is time to compile the costs and the estimates. This can
be fun, scary, and dreadful. If you have chosen a builder, he or she
will do or have done all of this for you. Builders have different meth-
ods of estimating the cost of a house and how they will charge for
their services.

Most builders build a turnkey house. They mark up the costs for all
labor and materials and this is how they make their proﬁt. In this cir-
cumstance, the more upgrades you choose, the more proﬁt the
builder makes. Usually, this type of builder may also be the devel-
oper of a subdivision, so you will have several house plans and lay-
outs to choose from and different customizations you choose will
add speciﬁc costs to a house. Once construction begins, if you
decide you want to make a change, you will be required to sign a
change-order form. This form is in essence an amendment to the
contract you have with the builder, and you will be responsible for
the additional expense of this change. In some circumstances, you
will also be charged a penalty fee for making the change after con-
struction has begun. The penalty fee may be as little as $50 and can
be as much as several hundred dollars and is usually payable in
advance when you sign the change-order form. If your change is
something the builder feels is very personal or customized, he or she
may ask for the entire cost of the change to be paid for in advance

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

4 1

4 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

and stipulate that this charge is nonrefundable should you back out
of the contract or decide not to close on the house. The builder may
demand this for something that seems small to the homeowner like
the color of the wall paint or a siding color because he or she may
feel this could affect the resale of this house or other houses in his
development. This is the way a builder can better control his or her
project and construction schedule, because changes cost everyone a
great deal of time and money. Something that takes 2 days to change
may affect the entire construction on a house by weeks because of
the scheduling of crews and materials to compensate. Builders try to
discourage changes because they are costly to everyone. The best
thing to do is decide on what you want your house to be like before
construction begins.

Some builders will get bids from all of the vendors and subcontrac-
tors on a house and charge you for the speciﬁc services they render
(i.e., any labor they furnish, construction supervision, construction
clean-up, etc.). This can save you a substantial amount of money
since builders’ markups may range anywhere from 10 percent to as
much as 100 percent on certain items. Most builders will make
somewhere between 10 percent and 25 percent on a project over
and above the cost of materials and labor. A builder may or may not
disclose his or her costs to the homeowner. This is considered priv-
ileged information and most suppliers and vendors will not disclose
the builders’ cost of materials. A builder developing a subdivision is
less apt to reveal any cost information to the homeowner.

If you are having a house built on your own property by a builder,
you should ask the builder for an itemized detail of all costs associ-
ated with the construction of your house. The builder will have to
supply lien waivers for all materials and labor and the amount paid
will be on the lien waiver form. Before construction begins, you
should get estimates of all costs and ﬁll out the comparative cost
estimates, electrical ﬁxture worksheet, and preliminary construction
estimates worksheets. This may seem cumbersome, but this is your
foundation for creating a real budget for your construction project.
If the builder has compiled all of the estimates, this will be an easy
task. Once you are able to compare prices and what you get for the
expense, you will be able to make wise decisions about where some

G E T T I N G T H E E S T I M A T E S

4 3

things need to be decreased or increased. This will also give you the
basis of where every penny of your construction is spent.

Whether you are using a builder/developer of a speciﬁc subdivision
or using a builder for your own property, be sure to ask if and what
you will be charged for any upgrades. There have been circum-
stances of homeowners upgrading what they thought would be a
few hundred dollars and ﬁnd that they were charged many hun-
dreds more because of change-order penalties, restocking charges,
and builders’ markup. 

Example: The homeowners decided they would upgrade the
refrigerator from the $900 standard model in the original bid to the
$1700 model. They expected the $800 additional charge; however,
when they went to the closing the charge was $3400. They were
charged a change penalty, a 25 percent restocking fee for the refrig-
erator they did not buy, and the builder’s 100 percent markup.
Because of their contract with the builder, they had to pay. Please be
aware that it is very common for all vendors to charge a 25 percent
or greater restocking fee for any item that has been ordered.

It is recommended that you take the time and energy to get the cost
estimates from several suppliers and subcontractors yourself. This is
not to suggest that once you start working with a builder and he has
put forth the time and effort to get estimates for you that you change
midstream to another builder. If you ﬁnd his or her ethics or quality
of work lacking, then a change is deemed necessary. If you get some
of the estimates, you will have better knowledge of comparison, but
be sure the things you are getting estimates on are comparable. If
you are getting a lumber bid from several suppliers, be sure not to
just look at the bottom line, but at the quantities also. Lumber com-
panies are notorious for shorting amounts needed to make the esti-
mate appear lower; then when the actual construction is underway
you may ﬁnd that a much greater quantity of materials is needed.

This page intentionally left blank 

10

How to Use the Workbook

T he sample forms given in this chapter have been created to
help you get started for actually using the homeowner’s construction
workbook.

The comparative cost estimates form is broken down into two
categories.

Cabinetry is designed to allow you to compare the costs of four
different brands and styles of cabinetry for your house.
Usually one brand and/or color and style will be used
throughout the house, but you are not limited to this tradition.
It is becoming more common to mix and match brands and
colors in kitchens and master bathrooms. This form allows
you to break down the individual kitchen cabinetry cost, mas-
ter bathroom cost, three additional bathrooms, laundry room
cost, and two miscellaneous extra costs (perhaps for garage or
basement). By breaking down each group into its cost, you
will be able to compare and decide which provides the best
value to you for the cost of the product. An area is provided
for you to make notes about products, styles, and suppliers.

Plumbing, like cabinetry, is also divided into kitchen, master
bathroom, three additional bathrooms, laundry room, and
two extra areas for special needs (Fig. 10-1). 

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

4 5

4 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

COMPARITIVE COST ESTIMATES

CABINETRY:
CABINET
BRAND / STYLE

KITCHEN
COST

MASTER BATH
 ROOM COST

BATH #1
COST

BATH #2
COST

BATH #3
COST

LAUNDRY
COST

EXTRA

EXTRA

TOTAL

AB Bradn/Maple Cathedral

9,565.00

1,575.00

950.00

425.00

Kitchens Plus / Oak Raised

7,250.00

1,720.00

850.00

523.00

Classic / White Raised

8,375.00

1,775.00

625.00

502.00

591.00

508.00

617.00

 $ 13,106.00

$ 10,851.00

$ 11,894.00

NOTES:

Linked the maple finish and color best - better hardware and drawers, but more than budgeted.

S A M P L E

BATH #1
COST

PLUMBING FIXTURES:
FIXTURE
BRAND / STYLE

KITCHEN
COST

MASTER BATH
 ROOM COST

BATH #2
COST

BATH #3
COST

Alpha / Antiquity Chrome

354.00

754.00

640.00

Foster/Modern Brushed Nic

653.00

985.00

678.00

Metaquatic/Contemp/Brass

795.00

894.00

763.00

NOTES:

FIGURE 10-1
Comparative cost estimates.

LAUNDRY
COST

EXTRA

EXTRA

TOTAL

235.00

350.00

363.00

 $ 1,983.00

 $ 2,666.00

$ 2,815.00

SAMPLE PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATES WORKSHEETS

These worksheets allow for the comparisons of two bids in every
category of construction. If you get more than two bids or estimates,
you need to narrow the possibilities to two bids and record their
estimate amounts in the respective columns. By keeping track of
these, you will be able to make decisions regarding what you are
willing to allow for the budget in certain categories. You may not
always take the lowest price if the vendor or subcontractor offers a
better value for the cost of the service or product. This will also
allow you to compare the price of your top two choices in each cat-
egory (Fig. 10-2). 

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

4 7

CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATES WORKSHEET

LOT NUMBER: 123

HOMEOWNER:

SUBDIVISION:
Mr. and Mrs. Happy  Homeowner

Happy Acres

Item or Description

Vendor / Subcontractor

Amount of
Estimate Number 1

Amount of
Estimate Number 2

1 ALL PERMIT FEES

2 ALL UTILITY TAP FEES

3 BLUEPRINTS / DRAFTING / COPIES

4 CLEARING

Dig and clear

Big Boy Excavating

1,500.00

1,350.00

5 EXCAVATING AND ROUGH GRADING

Dig and clear

2,500.00

3,500.00

1,200.00

1,100.00

2,200.00

3,250.00

13,000.00

17,000.00

7,800.00

7,500.00

6 BACKFILL AND FINAL GRADE

7 UTILITY INSTALLATION

8

9

FOUNDATION

FLATWORK

10 WATERPROOFING AND DRAINTILE

11 MASONRY

12 SEPTIC / SEWER SYSTEM

13 STEEL AND IRON

14 LUMBER

Big Boy Excavating

Dig and clear

Big Boy Excavating

Water In The Ground

Greens Utilities

ABC Concrete

Joe’s Concrete
ABC Concrete

Joe’s Concrete

S A M P L E

15 CARPENTRY FRAMING LABOR

16 DECK MATERIAL AND  LABOR

17 TRUSSES AND CRANE TO SET TRUSSES

FIGURE 10-2
Preliminary construction estimates worksheet.

SUBTOTALS

4 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

SAMPLE ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

Once you have decided upon the vendors and subcontractors who
will do your work and have accrued all costs for permits, tap fees,
and so on, you will be ready to create a detailed cost of each item
needed for the construction of your house. As bills and invoices are
paid, insert the amount of each item in the “amount” column and

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

125.00

S A M P L E

225.00

PERMIT FEES:
SUBDIVISION
COUNTY BUILDING
CITY BUILDING
FIRE INSPECTION
WATER
SEWER / SEPTIC
TERMITE INSPECTION
GAS
PHONE
CABLE
ROAD / STREET
ELECTRIC TAP FEE:
ADDITIONAL:
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

BLUEPRINTS:
COPIES
CHANGES
ORIGINAL DESIGN LAYOUT
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

SURVEY AND LAYOUT:
SURVEY
LAYOUT
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
Sample itemized cost-detail form.

125.00

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
350.00

-
-

$ 350.00

AMOUNT
235.00

2,000.00

SUBTOTALS

235.00
2,235.00

-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

500.00

-
-
-

$ 2,235.00

AMOUNT
375.00
125.00

$ 500.00

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

4 9

keep a running subtotal in the “subtotals” column. At the end of each
category, carry down the last subtotal number to the bottom of the
amount column for a total for that category, once all invoices have
been received and paid. Once a category is completed the total cost
is entered and the amount will be transferred to the cost detail form
in the next section (Fig. 10-3).

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

CLEARING/EXCAVATING:
CLEARING
ROUGH EXCAVATION
ROUGH GRADING
BACKFILL
DIRT REMOVAL / ADD
FINAL GRADING
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

$ 18,500.00

AMOUNT
3,500.00
8,250.00
1,200.00
3,200.00
1,000.00
1,350.00

SUBTOTALS

11,750.00
12,950.00
16,150.00
17,150.00
18,500.00

-
-
-
-
-

FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATION:
FOOTINGS
FOUNDATION WALLS
RETAINER WALLS
PIER PADS
ROCK
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

UTILITY INSTALLATION:
ELECTRIC FROM HOUSE
GAS FROM HOUSE
SEWER LINE FROM HOUSE
WATER FROM HOUSE TO METER
WATER FROM METER TO MAIN
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

AMOUNT
1,500.00
9,000.00

1,000.00
500.00

SUBTOTALS

10,500.00

1,000.00
1,500.00

-
-
-
-
-
-

$ 12,000.00

AMOUNT
500.00

1,500.00
150.00
150.00

$ 2,300.00

SUBTOTALS

1,500.00
1,650.00
1,800.00

-
-

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

5 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

AMOUNT
1,500.00
1,500.00
3,500.00
500.00
500.00

SUBTOTALS

3,000.00
6,500.00
7,000.00
7,500.00

DRIVEWAY AND FLATWORK:
GARAGE FLOOR
BASEMENT FLOOR
DRIVEWAY
PATIO PAD
SIDEWALK
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

-
-
-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

1,200.00
2,100.00
6,100.00
6,500.00

-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

495.00
790.00
895.00

-
-
-
-
-

$ 7,500.00

SEPTIC / SEWER INSTALLATION:
SOILS ANALYSIS
SEPTIC ENGINEERING
SEPTIC EXCAVATION
SEPTIC INSTALLATION
ELECTRIC TO PUMP METER BOX
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

WATERPROOFING / DRAINTILE:
DRAINTILE MATERIAL
DRAIN PIPE AROUND FOUNDATION
DISBURSEMENT TANKS
SPRAY WATERPROOFING
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

AMOUNT
300.00
900.00
900.00
4,000.00
400.00

$ 6,500.00

AMOUNT
195.00
300.00
295.00
105.00

$ 895.00

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

5 1

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

SUBTOTALS

17,500.00
22,500.00
29,500.00
30,200.00
30,600.00
32,600.00

-
-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

500.00
800.00

-
-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

19,000.00
22,000.00
23,500.00
26,000.00
26,900.00

AMOUNT
12,500.00
5,000.00
5,000.00
7,000.00
700.00
400.00
2,000.00

EXTERIOR MASONRY / SIDING / GUTTERS:
MASONRY
STONE MASONRY
DRYVIT / STUCCO 
SIDING
GUTTERS
SOFFITS
SIDING INSTALLATION LABOR
GUTTER INSTALLATION LABOR
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

STEEL / IRON:
STEEL / IRON - DRIVEWAY
STEEL / IRON - FOUNDATION
STEEL / IRON - INTERIOR 
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

LUMBER/TRUSSES/FRAMING MATERIALS:
TRUSSES
FRAMING LUMBER
SUBFLOOR MATERIALS
MISC. ADHESIVES/NAILS/WRAPS
ROOFING SHEETING
CRANE TO SET TRUSSES
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

$ 32,600.00

AMOUNT
200.00
300.00
300.00

$ 800.00

AMOUNT
8,000.00
11,000.00
3,000.00
1,500.00
2,500.00
900.00

$ 26,900.00

5 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

ROOFING MATERIALS & LABOR:
FELT PAPER
SHINGLES / RIDGEVENT
INSTALLATION LABOR
DELIVERY / CRANE
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

AMOUNT
600.00
4,800.00
3,500.00
200.00

SUBTOTALS

5,400.00
8,900.00
9,100.00

$ 9,100.00

WINDOWS AND EXTERIOR DOORS
WINDOWS
ENTRANCE DOOR / SIDELIGHTS
ENTRANCE DOOR TRANSOM
REAR DOOR
SLIDING GLASS DOORS
GARAGE SERVICE DOOR
GARAGE DOORS & OPENERS
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

PLUMBING MATERIALS / LABOR:
PLUMBING LABOR
PLUMBING FIXTURES
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

CARPENTRY LABOR:
FRAMING LABOR
TRIM CARPENTRY
PROJECT LABOR (CLEAN-UP)
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

AMOUNT
13,000.00
3,000.00
1,000.00
200.00
600.00
200.00
1,500.00

$ 19,500.00

AMOUNT
4,000.00
7,000.00

$ 11,000.00

AMOUNT
15,000.00
9,000.00
5,000.00

$ 29,000.00

SUBTOTALS

16,000.00
17,000.00
17,200.00
17,800.00
18,000.00
19,500.00

-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

11,000.00

-

SUBTOTALS

24,000.00
29,000.00

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

5 3

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

AMOUNT
5,000.00
2,500.00

$ 7,500.00

AMOUNT
3,200.00
10,000.00
10,000.00

SUBTOTALS

7,500.00

-

SUBTOTALS

13,200.00
23,200.00

$ 38,200.00

AMOUNT
875.00
1,100.00
1,000.00
300.00

-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

1,975.00
2,975.00
3,275.00

-
-

ELECTRICAL WIRING / LABOR / FIXTURES:
ELECTRICAL LABOR / WIRING
ELECTRICAL FIXTURES:
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

INSULATION / DRYWALL / PAINTING:
INSULATION
DRYWALL
PAINTING
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

MIRRORS / SHELVING/SHOWERDOORS
MIRRORS
SHELVING
SHOWERDOORS
TOWELBARS
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

$ 3,275.00

CABINETS/APPLIANCES/COUNTERTOPS
CABINETS
COUNTERTOPS
RANGE
REFRIGERATOR
MICROWAVE
OVEN
WASHER / DRYER
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

AMOUNT
15,000.00

SUBTOTALS

800.00
1,200.00
600.00

1,200.00

$ 18,800.00

15,000.00
15,800.00
17,000.00
17,600.00
17,600.00
18,800.00

-
-
-
-

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

5 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

AMOUNT
2,000.00
1,200.00

$ 3,200.00

AMOUNT
10,000.00

5,000.00

6,000.00

SUBTOTALS

3,200.00

-

SUBTOTALS

10,000.00
15,000.00
15,000.00
21,000.00

-
-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

2,100.00
3,300.00

-
-
-

SUBTOTALS

7,000.00
10,000.00

-

FIREPLACE / MANTLE:
FIREBOX
MANTLE
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FINISH FLOORING
CERAMIC TILE
LINOLEUM
CARPETING
HARDWOOD / LAMINATE
STONE / SLATE
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

S A M P L E

CLEANING
DUMPSTER FEES
WINDOW CLEANING
FINAL CONSTRUCTION CLEAN-UP
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

$ 21,000.00

AMOUNT
1,500.00
600.00
1,200.00

LANDSCAPING
FINISH GRADE
SOD / SEED
TREES
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

$ 3,300.00

AMOUNT
2,500.00
4,500.00
3,000.00

$ 10,000.00

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

5 5

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL FORM

AMOUNT
200.00
75.00

SUBTOTALS

275.00

S A M P L E

MISC. EXPENSES & RENTALS:
CRANE RENTAL
PORTABLE HEATER RENTAL
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
______________________________________
TOTAL

FIGURE 10-3
(Continued)

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

$ 275.00

5 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

SAMPLE COST DETAIL FORM

When you have decided on a particular vendor or subcontractor and
have accepted his or her bid or estimate, you will record the name of
whom you selected in the subcontractor/vendor column and the
amount of their bid in the amount of estimate column. This will be
your control column and it is the number you do not want to exceed
during construction. You will refer back to this paper often during con-
struction and once a category of construction is complete, you will
enter the total from the itemized cost detail form into the actual cost
column of this form. You will then subtract the actual cost from the
amount of estimate to get an overage or balance available. Some areas
will be an overage, but some areas will be less than originally thought
and leave a balance. The most important number to keep track of is the
accumulation of actual costs, and keep that number in comparison with
the total amount of estimates. If you see you have numerous overages,
you need to scan areas of soft costs to see if you can cut some costs to
make up for the overages or discuss your situation with your lender early
during construction. There are some circumstances where overages can-
not be predicted and are bound to happen. One of the most common is
excavation because of running into an unforeseen situation with the
property such as extra rock or an underground spring. A lender is usu-
ally more accommodating in these situations over a large overage in a
soft cost area (Fig. 10-4).

H O W T O U S E T H E W O R K B O O K

5 7

S A M P L E

FIGURE 10-4
Sample cost detail form.

5 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

FIGURE 10-4
(Continued)

$98.72

LOT NUMBER: 123 SUBDIVISION: HAPPY ACRES  
HOMEOWNER: MR. AND MRS. HAPPY COUPLE

SAMPLE COST DETAIL FORM

Amount of
Estimate

Actual
Cost

Overage /
Balance

Item

Subcontractor / Vendor

44 FIREPLACE

LIGHTS ON THE WALL, INC.

3,200.00

3,200.00

45 FINISH FLOORING

FLOORS AND MORE FLOORS 

21,000.00

21,000.00

46 FINAL CONSTRUCTION CLEAN 

A-Z CONSTRUCTION, INC.

1,200.00

1,200.00

47 TRASH / DUMPSER FEE

SUCH A WASTE, INC.

1,500.00

1,500.00

48 WINDOW CLEANING

I CAN SEE CLEARLY NOW, INC.

600.00

600.00

49 LANDSCAPING

GROOM AND GROW NURSERY

10,000.00

10,000.00

50

-

51

-

52

-

53

-

54

-

55

-

56

-

57

-

58

-

59

-

60

-

61

-

62

-

63

-

64

-

65

-

66

-

67

-

68

-

69

-

70

-

71

-

72

-

73

-

74

-

75

TOTAL

$356,105.00

$10,585.00

$345,520.00

TOTAL SQ. FT OF LIVING AREA 

3,500

3,500

COST / SQ. FT. LIVING AREA

$3.02

Balance of 
remaining
funds.

Accumulation of 
total actual 
expenses and total 
cost of 
construction.

Total of bids and 
estimates.

Total square feet of 
living area.

By dividing the total of 
Actual Costs by the 
number of square feet of 
living area the cost per 
square foot is 
determined.

S A M P L E

3,500

$101.74

11

Creating Your 
Construction Schedule

C reating a construction schedule is the key to keeping control of
your project. By getting an idea of how long each trade will take to
complete, it is easier to move something that has already been
scheduled than it is to ﬁrst get it on the books. Once you establish a
rapport with your subcontractors, it will be easier for them to work
with you and try to meet your needs.

In the beginning, be sure to ask and note how long it will take to get
permits and how far in advance you must call to schedule any
inspections. When you are getting the bids from each subcontractor
and vendor, be sure to ask how long it will take for them to complete
the work or get the product you need. Once you accept a bid or an
estimate from a vendor or a subcontractor, note on the bid how long
it will take for them to complete their work. This is important and
they need to agree to this in any contract you sign with them. They
also need to agree that once their crew begins your job, they will not
leave your job until it is either completely ﬁnished or is as far as they
can go until whatever else needs to be completed. Once you get to
a point where people are standing around waiting, the subcontrac-
tor will start losing money and will pull the crew for another job.
Then it becomes difﬁcult to get them back until they are either ﬁn-
ished with the other job or to a point where they can stop. This is the

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

5 9

6 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

place where most builders and homeowners get into big trouble and
lose time, which becomes quite costly.

What you don’t want to happen is for a subcontractor to give you a
great bid, but he is extremely busy and cannot give you a full crew
for a full day. In that case, he may give you one man for 1or 2 hours
at a time. A job that is slated to take 1 week could take 3 or 4 weeks.
This could cause every other subcontractor major problems while
they wait for something to be completed before they can start their
part of the project.

Example: The insulator cannot start until the plumber, electrician,
and heating ventilation and air conditioning subcontractors are ﬁn-
ished and any inspections are passed. The electrician has begun
pulling wires and installing boxes. He indicated it would be a three-
day job. On the second day, the worker leaves a couple of hours
early and doesn’t show up on the third day. On the fourth day, now
one day beyond the schedule, the worker is there for 2 hours instead
of 8 hours and is still not ﬁnished. On the ﬁfth day he still is not ﬁn-
ished because he has begun other jobs and cannot leave them yet. You
are now waiting for a few hours of work to be completed so that you
can order and schedule inspections. In essence, one day costs you at
least a week and quite possibly more than that. This is why it is so
important to have your subcontractors commit, as much as is
humanly possible, to get their part completed in a timely manner. Be
advised, they probably will not sign a contract guaranteeing a spec-
iﬁed time schedule. Unless you are a huge builder with extreme
clout, the best you can hope for is a sincere attempt to meet some
kind of realistic schedule.

When getting estimates and bids for materials, ask how long it will
take to get the product. In some cases, windows and doors take a
minimum of 21 days or longer from order to delivery, so these items
must be ordered as soon as the excavation begins. If ordering spe-
cialty items, it may take 6 to 8 weeks or longer for delivery. This is
crucial with items such as cabinets. You must take this into consider-
ation when preparing your schedule and notate when the order must
be placed. Also check with the vendor because some manufacturers

C R E A T I N G Y O U R C O N S T R U C T I O N S C H E D U L E

6 1

stop production during holiday periods or other times of the year.
Trim-out cannot be completed until cabinets are installed. The
plumber and electricians cannot ﬁnish until the countertops, sinks,
and appliances are installed.

Weather is the most unpredictable factor in scheduling. Take this
into consideration for determining the best season and month to
begin construction. If you are building in an area of the country you
are not familiar with, take some extra time to research the climate
characteristics of the area. You cannot control the weather, but logis-
tically, if April is the rainy season, you may want to schedule exca-
vation and foundation work to be completed before or after April.
Once the house is framed and under roof, weather will have less
effect on the construction process. The most important thing is to get
under roof as soon as possible so that materials do not get damaged
by weather.

When you are getting bids, be sure to ask how far in advance the
subcontractors and vendors need to be called for scheduling. If you
should encounter a delay or get ahead of schedule, be sure to con-
tact everyone affected so they can adjust their schedules accordingly.
Most subcontractors should be contacted two weeks before you
need them and again one week prior to their scheduled start date,
and ﬁnally two days prior to their scheduled start date.

The schedule is a guideline for your project. It will help you not only
to see how long it will take until you can move in, it will also help
budget as to how much interest you will have to pay during the con-
struction process (Fig. 11-1).

6 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

FIGURE 11-1
Sample construction schedule.

12

What You Can Do
to Save Money

I f you decide that you want to act as your own general con-
tractor, you can save 10 to 25 percent over the cost of the house. If
you do it wrong, it can cost 30 percent or more to ﬁx it. If you have
some building experience, being your own general contractor can
be a challenging and rewarding experience. If you do not have any
building experience, and you still want to be a general contractor,
hiring a construction superintendent or construction foreman to
check the quality during construction is a must. There are numerous
times when the homeowner frets about inconsequential matters and
is oblivious to major structural issues that arise. You don’t always
need to hire an engineer, but by hiring a construction superintend-
ent to check the project occasionally, you are doing some quality
control.

A major area in which the homeowner can save money is by clean-
ing the job site regularly and daily, if possible. A subcontractor
deserves to come onto a clean job site to perform his or her trade.
By having the site ready for the subcontractor, you are saving his or
her time, which is saving you time and money. Some subcontractors
clean up after themselves, but do not count on it unless it has been
speciﬁed in their bid. They do not clean up after the subcontractors
who worked before them, and they may charge you if they have to.
If you clean the job site daily, everyone has a fresh start each day.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

6 3

6 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

Most of the time they are grateful being able to get to work and get
the job ﬁnished quickly. It is most helpful to supply a trashcan for
lunch trash and marked as such.

There is a small savings by purchasing plumbing ﬁxtures directly
from the plumbing supplier and avoiding the markup. However, the
markup is usually minimal and if parts are missing, you will have to
go back to the supplier rather than the plumber. Also, the plumber
may not warrant materials he or she did not purchase. 

Get all estimates and bids for everything before you break ground.
You can seek out additional bids, estimates, and changes if you have
not signed any agreements, but never start construction without
knowing what to expect for expenses. Do not think you know the
cost of an item. Go get the actual cost. Do not bid over the phone.
Take the blueprint to the contractor and let him or her look at it and
discuss it in detail. If you are using special materials tell everyone
even remotely involved in the very beginning.

The homeowner’s construction workbook is designed to help you
create a realistic budget. You may still have an overage at the end of
the project, but it should be a minimal one and one that you may be
able to anticipate early on. If you begin early and do the research
needed, you will alleviate a great deal of the stress associated with
building a house. Remember, it’s just a house.

Now, let’s get to work.

13

Frequently Asked Questions

How much is building a house going to cost?

This is a complicated question and deserves a detailed answer.
While the entire book is devoted to answering this question, Chaps.
6 and 8 will guide you to ﬁnd the answer that will suit you and your
situation.

How much should the house cost in relation to the property
it is being built on? 

While this answer varies greatly, a general formula can be found in
Chap. 8.

Can I make changes after construction begins? 

This may seem like a silly question, but of course you can. However,
Chap. 9 gives examples of what changes can do to your budget.

Can we add another bathroom in the basement? 

This seems like a simple enough question, but again can present
problems if construction is too far along. Chapters 7, 8, and 9 have
guidelines for helping you make a decision.

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

6 5

6 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

Since the basement is ﬁnished, can I store my furniture there? 

The answer to this question should always be “no.” It does not mat-
ter that you own the property or house being built. Besides the lia-
bility of loss and damage to personal belongings that will be placed
on the builder and subcontractors, all trades deserve a place to do
their work unobstructed. See Chap. 12 for details.

When can I move in? 

See “After Construction” in the following construction workbook.

HOMEOWNER‘S CONSTRUCTION WORKBOOK

FOR: ____________________________________________________

LOT NUMBER: ______________/ SUBDIVISION: ______________

ADDRESS: _______________________________________________

CITY/STATE: ____________________________________________

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

6 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

Contents

BEFORE CONSTRUCTION
General Property Information
General Characteristics of the Property
Permits and Tap Fees
Who Needs What
Blueprint Log Sheet
Comparative Cost Estimates
Electrical Fixture Worksheet
Preliminary Construction Estimates Worksheet

DURING CONSTRUCTION
Itemized Cost Detail Worksheet
Actual Cost Detail
Disbursement Request
Waiver of Lien
Construction Schedule

AFTER CONSTRUCTION
Subcontractor List
Homeowner Responsibilities

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

6 9

BEFORE CONSTRUCTION

The following pages are to be used before construction. Compile
and research all items on each page to keep them permanently for
your ﬁles and for any future owners of the house. 

This is the information your builder will need and will be helpful in
the future for any realtor. 

GENERAL PROPERTY INFORMATION

PROPERTY OWNER(S):

LOT NUMBER AND SUBDIVISION:

911 STREET ADDRESS:

CITY / STATE / ZIP CODE:

COUNTY:

PROPERTY 911 PHONE CONTACT:

PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (P.I.N.):

ZONING:

SPECIAL VARIANCES:

SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:

PROPERTY SETBACKS:

SIDE SETBACK FROM PROPERTY LINE:

FRONT SETBACK FROM UTILITY EASEMENT:

BACKSET FROM PROPERTY LINE:

IMPORTANT LOCAL CONTACTS:

DISTRICT

NONEMERGENCY
PHONE NUMBER

FIRE DEPARTMENT:

POLICE DEPARTMENT:

GENERAL SCHOOL DISTRICT:

ELEMENTARY SCHOOL ADDRESS:

MIDDLE SCHOOL ADDRESS:

HIGH SCHOOL ADDRESS:

7 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROPERTY

COUNTY:

STATE:

IS THE PROPERTY WITHIN CITY LIMITS? 

Y___ N ___

CITY:

IF THE PROPERTY HAS BEEN SURVEYED IS THERE A PLAT?

Y________ N _________

ARE THE CORNERS MARKED BY SURVEY STAKES?

Y________ N _________

SURVEYED BY:

WHAT UTILITIES ARE ALREADY LOCATED ON THE PROPERTY?

WATER:  Y _____  N ______  CITY ________________ UTILITY COMPANY _________________

PRIVATE WELL ________ SHARED WELL _____________  COMMUNITY WELL ____________

SEWER SYSTEM:

 CITY / UTILITY COMPANY:

PRIVATE SEPTIC  ________________   INSTALLED BY:  __________________________________

COMMUNITY SEWER / MAINTAINED BY: _____________________________________________

GAS: NONE ___      PROPANE / SUPPLIER: ________________________________________________________

GAS: NATURAL _______________  GAS COMPANY: ________________________________________________

ELECTRIC: _____   ELECTRIC COMPANY: _______________________________________________________

TELEPHONE:  _______  TELEPHONE COMPANY: _________________________________________________

CABLE OR SATELLITE COMPANY: _____________________________________________________________

WASTE PROVIDER: ___________________________________________________________________________

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

7 1

PERMITS AND TAP FEES

What permits are required?

OFFICE/CONTACT

PHONE NUMBER:

COST / FEE

COUNTY:

CITY / TOWN:

SUBDIVISION:

OTHER:

Tap fees and deposits for service:

ELECTRIC:

WATER / WATER METER:

GAS:

SEWER:

TELEPHONE:

CABLE:

WASTE / REFUSE:

What inspections are required?

CONTACT / DEPARTMENT

PHONE NUMBER:

N/A

COUNTY:

CITY / TOWN:

SUBDIVISION:

HOMEOWNERS ASSN.:

HOUSE PLAN / LANDSCAPE:

CLEARING:

HOUSE LAYOUT / SETBACKS:

EXCAVATION:

FOUNDATION LAYOUT:

FOOTINGS:

FOUNDATION WALLS:

STEEL / IRON:

7 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

PERMITS AND TAP FEES

What inspections are required?

CONTACT / DEPARTMENT PHONE NUMBER:

N/A

FRAMING:

FLATWORK:

ELECTRIC ROUGH:

PLUMBING ROUGH:

INSULATION:

SEPTIC / SEWER:

DRYWALL:

PLUMBING FINAL:

ELECTRIC FINAL:

OCCUPANCY PERMIT:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

:

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

7 3

WHO NEEDS WHAT

This is the basic list of who will need what information you either have gathered or will need to gather.

THE LENDER

WHO

NEEDS WHAT

COPY OF PLAT

ONE SET OF BLUEPRINTS

PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE

DISBURSEMENT REQUESTS WITH INVOICES

ORIGINALS OF LIEN WAIVERS

THE ARCHITECT / DRAFTSMAN

COPY OF PLAT

ALL COVENANTS AND RESTRICTIONS

REQUIRED SETBACK FROM PROPERTY LINES

RECORDED EASEMENTS

SURVEY ENGINEER

COPY OF PLAT AND PROPERTY LOCATION

MUNICIPALITY OR SUBDIVISION

COPY OF PLAT

FOR PERMIT APPLICATION

TWO FULL SETS OF BLUEPRINTS

COPY OF PLAT WITH HOUSE LAYOUT

WATER AND SEWER LINE LAYOUT

HOMEOWNER

COPY OF PLAT WITHOUT HOUSE

(These will be important to keep for

COPY OF PLAT WITH HOUSE, WATER, AND SEWER LAYOUT

any future resale of property as well.)

ONE SET OF BLUEPRINTS

WARRANTY DEED OR DEED OF TRUST

ALL UTILITY METER BOX NUMBERS

MOST CURRENT REAL ESTATE TAX RECORD

ALL COVENANTS AND RESTRICTIONS

7 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

BLUEPRINT LOG SHEET

Phone
Number

Blueprint
Page

Date
Out

Date
Returned

Vendor or
Subcontractor

Material
or Trade

PERMIT

PERMIT

PERMIT

SEPTIC ENGINEER

SEPTIC ENGINEER

LOT CLEARING

LOT CLEARING

EXCAVATION

EXCAVATION

FOUNDATION

FOUNDATION

FLATWORK

FLATWORK

LUMBER

LUMBER

WINDOWS

WINDOWS

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

7 5

BLUEPRINT LOG SHEET

Phone
Number

Blueprint
Page

Date
Out

Date
Returned

Vendor or
Subcontractor

Material
or Trade

ROOFING

ROOFING

FRAMING CREW

FRAMING CREW

INSULATION

INSULATION

ELECTRICIAN

ELECTRICIAN

PLUMBER

PLUMBER

HVAC

HVAC

SIDING

SIDING

MASONRY

MASONRY

GUTTERS

GUTTERS

7 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

BLUEPRINT LOG SHEET

Phone
Number

Blueprint
Page

Date
Out

Date
Returned

Vendor or
Subcontractor

Material
or Trade

FIREPLACE

FIREPLACE

DRYWALL

DRYWALL

PAINTING

PAINTING

CABINETRY

CABINETRY

FLOORING

FLOORING

TRIM CARPENTRY

TRIM CARPENTRY

MILLWORK

MILLWORK

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

7 7

BLUEPRINT LOG SHEET

Vendor or
Subcontractor

Material
or Trade

LANDSCAPE

LANDSCAPE

Phone
Number

Blueprint
Page

Date
Out

Date
Returned

COMPARATIVE COST ESTIMATES

CABINETRY:

Cabinet
Brand / Style

Kitchen
Cost

Master Bath
Cost

Bath #1
Cost

Bath #2
Cost

Bath #3
Cost

Laundry
Cost

Extra

Extra

Total

NOTES:

7
8

PLUMBING FIXTURES:

Cabinet
Brand / Style

Kitchen
Cost

Master Bath
Cost

Bath #1
Cost

Bath #2
Cost

Bath #3
Cost

Laundry
Cost

Extra

Extra

Total

NOTES:

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

7 9

ELECTRICAL FIXTURE WORKSHEET

ELECTRICAL FIXTURES:

Room or Area

QTY

Brand

Model Number

Unit Cost

Subtotal

EXTERIOR:

FRONT ENTRANCE DOOR

GARAGE DOOR(S)

GARAGE SERVICE DOOR(S)

MOTION DETECTORS

PATIO

SIDEWALK

LIGHTPOST(S)

BACK ENTRANCE DOOR(S)

SLIDING DOOR(S)

EXTRA

EXTRA

INTERIOR:

KITCHEN:

SINK

ISLAND / BAR

CABINET INDIRECT

BREAKFAST NOOK

CEILING

ENTRY FOYER

HALLWAY - LOWER LEVEL

HALLWAY - MAIN LEVEL

HALLWAY - UPPER LEVEL

HALLWAY - BASEMENT

GREATROOM:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

ABOVE FIREPLACE

CAN LIGHTS

FORMAL LIVINGROOM

DINING ROOM

SUBTOTAL

PAGE 1

$

8 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ELECTRICAL FIXTURE WORKSHEET

Room or Area

QTY

Brand

Model Number Unit Cost

Subtotal

SITTING ROOM

MASTER BEDROOM:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

CAN LIGHTS

WALL SCONCE

MASTER CLOSET(S)

MASTER BATHROOM:

CAN LIGHTS

CEILING

VANITY NUMBER 1

VANITY NUMBER 2

BEDROOM NUMBER 1:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

CAN LIGHTS

BEDROOM NUMBER 2:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

CAN LIGHTS

BEDROOM NUMBER 3:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

CAN LIGHTS

DEN / OFFICE:

CEILING

CEILING FAN

BATHROOM NUMBER 1:

CEILING

VANITY

BATHROOM NUMBER 2:

CEILING

VANITY

SUBTOTAL

PAGE 2

$

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

8 1

ELECTRICAL FIXTURE WORKSHEET

Room or Area

QTY

Brand

Model Number Unit Cost

Subtotal

POWDER ROOM:

CEILING

VANITY

LAUNDRY ROOM:

STAIRWELL - SECOND STORY

STAIRWELL - BASEMENT

BASEMENT:

CEILING

CEILING FAN(S)

CAN LIGHTS

CLOSET(S):

ADDITIONAL ROOMS:

SUBTOTAL

PAGE 3

$

SUBTOTAL FROM PAGE 1
SUBTOTAL FROM PAGE 2
SUBTOTAL FROM PAGE 3

ELECTRICAL FIXTURE TOTAL

$

8 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATES WORKSHEET

LOT NUMBER:

SUBDIVISION:

HOMEOWNER:

Item or Description

Vendor / Subcontractor

Amount of
Estimate Number 1

Amount of
Estimate Number 2

1 ALL PERMIT FEES

2 ALL UTILITY TAP FEES

3 BLUEPRINTS / DRAFTING / COPIES

4 CLEARING

5

EXCAVATING AND ROUGH GRADING

6 BACKFILL AND FINAL GRADE

7 UTILITY INSTALLATION

8

9

FOUNDATION

FLATWORK

10 WATERPROOFING AND DRAINTILE

11 MASONRY

12 SEPTIC / SEWER SYSTEM

13 STEEL AND IRON

14 LUMBER

15 CARPENTRY FRAMING LABOR

16 DECK MATERIAL AND  LABOR

17 TRUSSES AND CRANE TO SET TRUSSES

SUBTOTALS

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

8 3

PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATES WORKSHEET

Item or Description

Vendor / Subcontractor

Amount of
Estimate Number 1

Amount of
Estimate Number 2

18 WINDOWS / EXTERIOR DOORS

19 ROOFING MATERIAL

20 ROOFING LABOR

21 SIDING AND LABOR

22 GUTTERS AND SOFFITS

23 MILLWORK AND LOCKSETS

24 TRIM CARPENTRY LABOR

25 INTERIOR STAIR PARTS / HANDRAILS

26 PLUMBING MATERIALS / LABOR

27 BATHROOM MARBLE

28 ELECTRICAL WIRING / LABOR

29 ELECTRICAL FIXTURES

30 HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING

31 INSULATION

32 DRYWALL HANG AND TAPE

33 PAINTING AND STAINING

34 MIRRORS/SHOWERDOORS

SUBTOTALS

8 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATES WORKSHEET

Item or Description

Vendor / Subcontractor

Amount of
Estimate Number 1

Amount of
Estimate Number 2

35 SHELVING

36 GARAGE DOORS AND OPENERS

37 PROJECT LABOR / JOBSITE CLEANUP

38 WASTE DISPOSAL FEES

39 CABINETS / KITCHEN COUNTERTOPS

40 APPLIANCES

41 FIREPLACE BOX AND MANTLE

42 FINISH FLOORING AND LABOR

43 WINDOW CLEANING

44 FINAL OCCUPANCY CLEANING

45 LANDSCAPING

46 JOB SUPERVISION/PROJECT MANAGER

47

48

49

50

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL
TOTAL sq. ft. of Living Area
**COST PER SQ. FT.

** Divide the total square foot of the living area into the total cost of construction to get the cost per square foot of construction.

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

8 5

DURING CONSTRUCTION

Once the loan is activated and all permits are acquired, it is time to
begin the project. The forms provided in the workbook will be used
throughout the construction process to keep track of expenses,
materials, subcontractors, and the construction schedule.

8 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

PERMIT FEES:

SUB DIVISION
COUNTY BUILDING
CITY BUILDING
FIRE INSPECTION
WATER
SEWER / SEPTIC
TERMITE INSPECTION
GAS
PHONE
CABLE
ROAD / STREET
ELECTRIC TAP FEE
ADDITIONAL FEES:

BLUEPRINTS:

ORIGINAL
COPIES
CHANGES
ADDITIONAL FEES:

SURVEY AND LAYOUT:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

SURVEY
LAYOUT
CHANGES
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

8 7

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

CLEARING / EXCAVATING:

CLEARING:
ROUGH EXCAVATION
ROUGH GRADING
BACKFILL
DIRT REMOVAL / DIRT ADD
FINAL GRADING
ADDITIONAL FEES:

FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATION:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

FOOTINGS
FOUNDATION WALLS
RETAINER WALLS
PIER PADS
ROCK / FILL
ADDITIONAL FEES:

UTILITY INSTALLATION:

ELECTRIC FROM HOUSE
GAS FROM HOUSE
SEWER LINE FROM HOUSE
WATER FROM HOUSE TO METER
WATER FROM METER TO MAIN
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

DRIVEWAY AND FLATWORK:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

GARAGE FLOOR
BASEMENT FLOOR
SLAB
DRIVEWAY   
PATIO PAD AND SIDEWALKS
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

8 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

SEPTIC / SEWER INSTALLATION:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

SOILS ANALYSIS
SEPTIC ENGINEERING
SEPTIC EXCAVATION
SEPTIC INSTALLATION
ELECTRIC TO PUMP METER BOX
ADDITIONAL FEES:

WATERPROOFING / DRAINTILE:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

DRAINTILE MATERIAL
DRAIN PIPE AROUND FOUNDATION
DISBURSEMENT TANKS
SPRAY-ON DAMPROOF SEALER
ADDITIONAL FEES:

EXTERIOR MASONRY / SIDING / GUTTERS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

MASONRY
STONE MASONRY
EIFS / STUCCO
SIDING MATERIAL AND LABOR
GUTTERS MATERIAL AND LABOR
SOFFITS MATERIAL AND LABOR
ADDITIONAL FEES:

STEEL / IRON:

STEEL / IRON - DRIVEWAY
STEEL / IRON - FOUNDATION
STEEL / IRON - INTERIOR
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

8 9

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

LUMBER / TRUSSES / FRAMING MATERIALS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TRUSSES / TRUSS MATERIAL
FRAMING LUMBER
SUBFLOOR MATERIALS
MISCELLANEOUS ADHESIVES/NAILS/WRAPS
ROOF SHEETING
CRANE TO SET TRUSSES
ADDITIONAL FEES:

ROOFING MATERIALS AND LABOR:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

FELT PAPER
SHINGLES / RIDGE VENT
INSTALLATION LABOR
DELIVERY / CRANE
ADDITIONAL FEES:

WINDOWS AND EXTERIOR DOORS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

WINDOWS  
ENTRANCE DOOR / SIDELIGHTS
ENTRANCE DOOR TRANSOM
SLIDING GLASS / FRENCH DOORS
GARAGE SERVICE DOOR(S)
REAR ENTRY DOORS
GARAGE DOOR(S) AND OPENERS
ADDITIONAL FEES:

PLUMBING MATERIALS / LABOR:

TOTAL

PLUMBING FIXTURES
PLUMBING LABOR

ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

9 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

CARPENTRY LABOR:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

FRAMING LABOR
DECK LABOR
TRIM-OUT CARPENTRY
PROJECT LABOR (JOB SITE CLEANUP)
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

ELECTRICAL WIRING/LABOR/FIXTURES:

ELECTRICAL WIRING AND LABOR
ELECTRICAL FIXTURES
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

INSULATION / DRYWALL / PAINTING:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

INSULATION          
DRYWALL HANG AND TAPE
PAINTING / STAINING
DECK SEALING
ADDITIONAL FEES:

MIRRORS/SHELVING/SHOWER DOORS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

MIRRORS    
SHELVING
SHOWER DOORS
TOWEL BARS
ADDITIONAL FEES:

FIREPLACE AND MANTEL:

FIREBOX

MANTLE
ADDITIONAL FEES:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

TOTAL

$

$

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

9 1

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

CABINETS/APPLIANCES/COUNTERTOPS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

CABINETS
COUNTERTOPS
RANGE / STOVE
REFRIGERATOR
MICROWAVE
DISHWASHER
OVEN
WASHER / DRYER
ADDITIONAL FEES:

FINISH FLOORING:

CERAMIC TILE
WALL TILE - KITCHEN / BATH
LINOLEUM
CARPETING
HARDWOOD / LAMINATE
STONE / SLATE
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

CLEANING:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

DUMPSTER FEES
WINDOW CLEANING
FINAL CONSTRUCTION CLEANUP
FINAL CLEANING PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY
ADDITIONAL FEES:

LANDSCAPING:

FINISH GRADE

SOD / SEED
TREES / SHRUBS / FLOWERS
ADDITIONAL FEES:

TOTAL

TOTAL

$

$

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

9 2

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ITEMIZED COST DETAIL WORKSHEET

MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES AND RENTALS:

AMOUNT

SUBTOTALS

TOTAL

$

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

9 3

ACTUAL COST DETAIL

LOT NUMBER: _________SUBDIVISION: ________________
HOMEOWNER:_______________________________________

Item

Subcontractor / Vendor

Amount of
Estimate

Actual
Cost

1

PERMITS

2 UTILITY TAP FEES

3

SURVEYING AND ENGINEERING

4 BLUEPRINTS AND COPIES

5 CLEARING

6

EXCAVATING AND ROUGH GRADING

7 BACKFILL AND FINAL GRADE

8 UTILITY INSTALLATION

9

FOUNDATION

10 FLATWORK

11 WATERPROOFING / DRAINTILE

12 SEWER / SEPTIC SYSTEM

13 STEEL AND IRON

14 LUMBER

15 TRUSSES AND CRANE TO SET

16 WINDOWS / EXTERIOR DOORS

17 CARPENTRY FRAMING LABOR

18 ROOFING MATERIAL AND LABOR

19 MASONRY (INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR)

20 SIDING MATERIALS AND LABOR

21 GUTTERS AND SOFFITS

22 INSULATION

23 ELECTRIC WIRING AND LABOR

24 PLUMBING MATERIALS AND LABOR

25 HVAC

26 DRYWALL HANG AND TAPE

27 PAINTING MATERIAL AND LABOR

28 EXTERIOR DECK MATERIALS AND LABOR

29 MILLWORK / LOCKSETS

30 INTERIOR STAIR MATERIALS

9 4

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

ACTUAL COST DETAIL

LOT NUMBER: _________SUBDIVISION: ________________
HOMEOWNER:_______________________________________

Item

Subcontractor / Vendor

Amount of
Estimate

Actual
Cost

31 TRIM CARPENTRY

32 FIREPLACE BOX AND MANTEL

33 MISC. MATERIALS AND RENTALS

34 PROJECT CLEANUP AND WASTE REMOVAL

35 BATHROOM MARBLE

36 ELECTRIC FIXTURES

37 CABINETS AND COUNTERTOPS

38 MIRRORS AND SHOWER DOORS

39 SHELVING

40 APPLIANCES

41 FINISH FLOORING

42 LANDSCAPING

43 WINDOW CLEANING

44 PROJECT SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT

45 OCCUPANCY CLEANING

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

TOTALS

TOTAL SQ. FT. OF LIVING AREA

DIVIDE TOTAL SQ. FT. INTO ACTUAL TOTAL TO GET THE TOTAL COST / SQ. FT.

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

9 5

DISBURSEMENT REQUEST

LOT NUMBER: _____________  SUBDIVISION: _______________________________________

HOMEOWNER/BORROWER: ______________________________________________________

Subcontractor or
Vendor

LIEN
WVR

Y/N

Description or
Services Rendered

Detail Item
Number

Check
Number Issued

Payment
Amount

TOTAL PAYOUT

$

NOTE:

We the undersigned certify that this disbursement request for payout is based on work in progress and/or materials furnished for

the building project as identified above.

TOTAL REQUESTED FROM LENDER

$

HOMEOWNER / BORROWER

SIGNED:

SIGNED:

DATE:

DATE:

DRAW NUMBER: ________

PROJECT MANAGER

9 6

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

WAIVER OF LIEN

State of:

County of:

To All Whom It May Concern:

Whereas, the undersigned has been employed by:

to furnish labor and/or materials for the building known as:

LOT NUMBER:

SUBDIVISION:

ADDRESS:
Now, therefore, the undersigned for and in consideration of the sum of

($

)

good and valuable considerations, the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, does hereby waive
and release any and all lien, and claim or right to lien, on said above described building and real
estate under the Statutes of the State of _____________________ relating to Mechanic’s Liens, on
account of Labor or Materials, or both, here to fore furnished by the undersigned for said building and
real estate.

In the event the bank check given in payment of the foregoing materials and/or labor should be
returned unpaid because of any fault or neglect of the make of the check, then this release shall become
null and void.

Given under our hands this ___________ day of _____________________, 20___.

By:

Title:

Company:

Invoice Number:

Check Number:

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

9 7

CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE

LOT NUMBER: ______
SUBDIVISION: _____________________

Description

Item
1 Get Permits
2 Plot Plan and Stake Out
3 Order Temporary Power - 
4 Order Trusses and Any Metal or Wood Beams
5 Order Windows
6 Order Exterior Doors
7 Excavation
8 Footings
9 Inspect:  Footings / Steel
10 Foundation / Metal or Wood Beams 
11 Inspect:  Foundation / Termite
12 Waterproofing / Draintile
13 Flatwork:  Basement & Garage
14 Flatwork:  Outside
15 Backfill and Rough Grade
16 Lumber
17 Framing
18 Plumbing Rough
19 HVAC Rough
20 Electric Rough
21 Order Interior and Exterior Handrails
22 Fireplace Box Installation
23 Tub & Shower Installation
24 Truss Delivery
25 Roof Load Materials
26 Masonry / Dryvit Installation
27 Siding Installation
28 Gutter and Soffit Installation
29 Insulation
30 Drywall Stock
31 Inspect:  Framing /Plumbing Rough /Electrical Rough
32 Garage Door Installation
33 Drywall Hanging
34 Inspect:  Drywall
35 Drywall Taping
36 Order Shower Doors and Mirrors
37 Order Marble Tops
38 Order Cabinets
39 Interior Paint
40 HVAC Final
41 Hang Interior Doors
42 Shelving Installation
43 Tile Installation
44 Marble Installation
45 Plumbing Final / Install Fixtures
46 Electric Final / Install Fixtures
47 Install Electric Meter and Permanent Service
48 Interior and Exterior Handrail Installation
49 Interior Trim and Rehang Doors
50 Shower Door and Mirror Installation
51 Window Clean 
52 Carpet Installation
53 Paint Touchup
54 Trim Carpenter
55 Construction Clean
56 Occupancy Inspection

Called

Scheduled

Projected
Days

Actual
Days

Days

Needed To Complete
According to Bid
Releases for Start
Permits

Lumber Set-Up

Stake Out

Excavation

Footing / Foundation

Sewer Extension

Waterproofing

Backfill

Lumber Delivery

Start Framing

Finish Framing

Roofing
Rough Plumbing
Electric / HVAC

Insulation

Drywall Hang

Drywall Tape/Sand

Paint

Hang Doors

Tile

Carpet

Cabinets / Final Trim
Final
Plumbing/Electric

Carpenter Final

Drywall Touchup

Paint Touchup

Windows / Clean

Final Inspection

Walk through

9 8

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

AFTER CONSTRUCTION

When the ﬁnal nail has been hammered and mirror polished, you
have ﬁnished. It is good to keep a record of the subcontractors and
vendors who worked on your house and how to contact them in
case warranty work needs to be done or you have questions once
you are living in the house.

Once everyone is ﬁnished, it is time to move in. The worst thing any-
one can do is to move in before everyone is completely ﬁnished. If
you move in before everyone is ﬁnished, the cost is greater than what
can be anticipated. Furniture and boxes are not only a liability, but
also a hindrance for anyone who must ﬁnish. No one wants to work
in a new house what has someone’s personal belongings because of
possible damage and accusations of theft. Personal belongings also
simply get in the way of workers not only making their job more dif-
ﬁcult, but also creating a situation of taking longer to get their work
ﬁnished.

Simply put, do not move anything in the house under any circum-
stances until everyone is completely out.

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

9 9

SUBCONTRACTOR LIST

LOT NUMBER:  _____________ SUBDIVISION: ______________________________________
HOMEOWNER: __________________________________________________________________

Subcontractor

Description

Phone Number

Cell Number

Fax Number

PROJECT MANAGER

BLUEPRINTS

SURVEYING ENGINEER

CLEARING

EXCAVATION

SEPTIC / SEWER

UTILITIES

WATER LINE INSTALL

FOUNDATION

WATERPROOFING

MASONRY

SIDING

GUTTERS / SOFFITS

LUMBER

WINDOWS

TRUSS COMPANY

FRAMING CREW

ROOFING MATERIAL

ROOFING LABOR

MILLWORK

STAIR PARTS

PLUMBER

PLUMBING FIXTURES

ELECTRICIAN

ELECTRIC FIXTURES

HVAC

INSULATION

1 0 0

S O .

.

. Y O U W A N T T O B U I L D A H O U S E

SUBCONTRACTOR LIST

LOT NUMBER:  _____________ SUBDIVISION: _____________________________________________
HOMEOWNER: __________________________________________________________________

Subcontractor

Description

Phone Number

Cell Number

Fax Number

DRYWALL

PAINT

PAINTING

MARBLE

MIRRORS

SHOWER DOORS

SHELVING

GARAGE DOORS

TRIM CARPENTRY

APPLIANCES

FIREPLACE

FLOORING

LANDSCAPING

WASTE DISPOSAL

CLEANING

WINDOW CLEANING

H O M E O W N E R ’ S C O N S T R U C T I O N W O R K B O O K

1 0 1

HOMEOWNER RESPONSIBILITIES

• Keep and ﬁll out all warranty information for all products and
appliances.
• Keep a list for callback services the builder will provide for.
Ask the builder for details about what is covered by any war-
ranty and what is considered a service call that the homeown-
er is responsible to pay for. The homeowner should not have
to pay for services that pertain to things that were installed
incorrectly or incompletely, but will be charged for items that
are considered a maintenance issue. For example, a leaky
pipe or ﬁtting would be warranted by a plumber for 1 year;
however, causing a leak in a pipe because of driving a nail
into it would not be covered.
• All lawn maintenance and care of plants is the responsibility
of the homeowner. Some suppliers warrant plants for 1 year,
but if the homeowner has not properly cared for the plant
with water and fertilizer, the warranty is void.
• The homeowner is responsible for maintaining caulked areas
including windows, base, showers, and tubs. Once caulking is
installed, it becomes the homeowner’s responsibility.
• The homeowner is responsible for maintaining decks and
exterior wood with paint or protective products. 

It is wise to go over your responsibilities with the builder through-
out the project and once the construction is ﬁnished, are aware of
your responsibilities in house maintenance.

This page intentionally left blank 

Index

Access easements, 7
Actual cost detail form, 93–94
Adhesives, cost of, 25
After-construction information,
98–100
Approved copy (blueprints), 12
Architect, meeting with, 11–14
Architectural seal, 11

Backﬁll, cost of, 25
Bank:
blueprint copy for, 12
disbursements from, 15–16
square foot lending rate from, 24
Basement:
adding bathrooms in, 65
storing furniture in, 66
Bathrooms, in basement, 65
Bay windows, cost of house and, 35
Before-construction information,
69–84
blueprint log sheet, 74–77
comparative cost estimates, 78
electrical ﬁxture worksheet, 79–81
general characteristics of the
property, 70
general property information, 69

Before-construction
information (Cont.):
permits and tap fees, 71–72
preliminary construction
estimates worksheet, 82–84
utilities on property, 70
who needs what form, 73
Bids:
blueprint copies for, 12–13
before breaking ground, 64
schedule information in, 59
time frame in, 60
Blueprint log sheet, 13–14
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 74–77
sample of, 14
Blueprints:
CAD drawings vs., 11
number of copies of, 12–13
tracking copies of, 13
Budget, 31–39
architect’s help with, 11
for cabinetry, 37
for countertops, 37–38
disclosing, to realtor, 9
for electrical ﬁxtures, 36–37
estimates as foundation for, 42–43

Copyright © 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

1 0 3

1 0 4

I N D E X

Budget (Cont.):
for ﬂooring, 38
for house design, 33–35
for land, 32
and lay of land, 33
for millwork and trim, 38–39
for plumbing ﬁxtures, 35–36
realistic, 64
for utilities, 32–33
Builders:
blueprints for, 12–13
estimates from, 41–43
Buried tanks/trash, 6

Cabinetry:
budget for, 37
in comparative cost estimates
form, 45, 46
comparing costs of, 45
cost of, 28
custom, value of, 24
upgrades for, 37
CAD drawings, 11
Ceiling design, cost of house
and, 35
Change-order form, 41
Changes, 65
cost of, 41–42
to customized houses, 2–3
and restocking fees, 43
schedule changes from, 42
Cleanup:
cost of, 27
of job site, 63–64
Clearing property, cost of, 25
Compaction test, 6
Comparative cost estimates form:
categories on, 45
getting estimates for, 42
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 78
sample of, 46

Computer-aided design (CAD)
drawings, 11
Concrete ﬂatwork, cost of, 25
Construction foreman, 63
Construction loans, disbursement
of funds from, 15–19
Construction schedule:
builder’s control of, 42
creating, 59–61
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 97
sample of, 62
Construction superintendent, 63
Corners, cost of house and, 34
Cost detail form:
sample of, 57–58
using, 56
(See also Itemized cost
detail form)

Costs:
builder’s markup of, 41, 42
of building a house, 65
of changes, 41–42
comparing (see Comparative
cost estimates form)
disbursement, 15
hard, 25–27, 35
itemized, from builder, 42
saving on, 63–64
soft, 27–29, 35
for title company, 16
total construction, 15
Countertops, budget
for, 37–38
County ordinances, 11
Custom cabinetry, 24
Custom houses, 1–3
Customized houses, 1

Decks, cost of house and, 35
Design of house:
budget for, 33–35

Design of house (Cont.):
and design in surrounding area,
21–22
lay of land, 33
Disbursement request form, 19
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 95
sample of, 18
Disbursing funds, 15–19
Dream houses, 1
Drywall, cost of, 26
During-construction information,
85–97
actual cost detail form, 93–94
construction schedule, 97
disbursement request form, 95
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 85–97
itemized cost detail worksheet,
86–92
waiver of lien form, 96

Easements, 7, 11
Electrical ﬁxture worksheet:
estimates for, 42
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 79–81
Electrical ﬁxtures:
budget for, 36–37
cost of, 28
Electrical wiring:
cost of, 26
and cost of house, 34
Engineered property, 6
Estimates, 41–43
before breaking ground, 64
comparing (see Comparative
cost estimates form)
preliminary (see Preliminary
construction estimates
worksheets)
time frame in, 60

I N D E X

1 0 5

Excavation, cost of, 25, 56
Exterior ﬁnish, cost of, 26–28

Fill areas, 6
Finished space, lending rates
for, 24
Floor coverings, cost of, 29
Flooring:
budget for, 38
upgrades in, 38
Foundation, cost of, 25
Framing, cost of, 25
Funds, disbursing, 15–19
Furniture, storing, 66

General characteristics of the
property form, 70
General contractor, acting
as, 63
General property information
form, 69

Hard costs, 25–27, 35
Hardware, budget for, 37–38
Hazardous waste dumps, 6–7
Homeowner responsibilities, 101
Homeowner’s construction
workbook, 67–101
actual cost detail form, 93–94
after-construction information,
98–100
before-construction information,
69–84
blueprint log sheet, 74–77
comparative cost estimates
form, 45–46, 78
construction schedule, 97
cost detail form, 56–58
disbursement request
form, 95
during-construction information,
85–97

1 0 6

I N D E X

Homeowner’s construction
workbook (Cont.):
electrical ﬁxture worksheet, 79–81
general characteristics of the
property form, 70
general property information
form, 69
homeowner responsibilities, 101
itemized cost detail worksheet,
48–55, 86–92
permits and tap fees, 71–72
preliminary construction
estimates worksheets,
46–47, 82–84
subcontractor list, 99–100
utilities on property form, 70
waiver of lien form, 96
who needs what form, 73
House plans:
number of copies needed, 12–13
ownership of, 12
(See also Design of house)

Inspections:
by construction
superintendent, 63
scheduling, 59
Insulation:
cost of, 26
value of, 24
Itemized cost detail form:
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 48–55, 86–92
sample of, 48–55
using, 48, 49
(See also Cost detail form)

Jetted tubs, 9
Job site, cleaning, 63–64

Land, budget for, 32
Landﬁlls, building on, 6

Landlocked properties, 7
Landscaping, cost of, 27
Lay of land, 33
Lenders:
blueprint copy for, 12
disbursements from, 15–16
square foot lending rate from, 24
Lending rates, square foot, 24
Lien waivers, 15–17, 19
Lumber:
bids on, 43
cost of, 25

Mandatory easements, 7
Markup of costs:
by builder, 41, 42
on plumbing ﬁxtures, 64
Market, building within, 21
Marketability of home, 21–24
Master set (blueprints), 12
Millwork:
budget for, 38–39
cost of, 27–29
upgrades in, 38

Nails, cost of, 25

Odd-shaped rooms, cost of house
and, 35
Offsets, cost of house and, 34
Open ﬂoor plans, economy of, 24
Ordinances, 11
Overspending, 31
Ownership of house plan, 12

Painting, cost of, 26
Patios, cost of house and, 35
Payments, making, 15–19
Penalty fee for changes, 41
Perfection, reality vs., 1
Permanent construction ﬁle, 12
Permits, 11, 59

Permits and tap fees, 71–72
Plat, 5
Plumbing:
in comparative cost estimates
form, 45, 46
cost of, 26
cost of house and location
of, 34
Plumbing ﬁxtures:
budget for, 35–36
cost of, 28
purchasing, 64
upgrades in, 36
Preliminary construction estimates
worksheets:
estimates for, 42
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 82–84
sample of, 47
using, 46
Price of house:
range for area/subdivision,
22–23
square foot pricing, 23–24
Property:
cost of house relative to, 65
easements/rights-of-way on, 7
engineered, 6
ﬁll areas in, 6
landlocked, 7
purchasing, 5–7
unbuildable, 7
Purchasing property, 5–7

Real estate taxes, value of area
houses and, 23
Realtors, 9–10
Responsibilities of
homeowner, 101
Restocking fees, 43
Rights-of-way, 7
Road easements, 7

I N D E X

1 0 7

Roof design, cost of house
and, 34
Rooﬁng, cost of, 26

Saving money, 38, 63–64
Schedule (see Construction
schedule)
Seal, architectural, 11
Setbacks:
and cost of house, 35
requirements for, 11
Sewer rights, 7
Shared easements, 7
Site (see Property)
Site engineering, 6
Soft costs, 27–29, 35
Soil testing, 6
Square foot pricing, 23–24
Style of houses, in surrounding
area, 21–22
Subcontractor list, 99–100
Subcontractors:
bids from, 42
blueprint copies for, 13
cleaning job site for, 63–64
comparing estimates from (see
Preliminary construction
estimates worksheets)
on cost detail form, 56
disbursements to, 15–19
estimates from, 43
interrupted work by, 59–60
lien waivers from, 15–17, 19
schedule adjustments for, 61
schedule commitment from,
59–60
Subdivisions:
changes to plans in, 42
ﬁll areas in, 6
price ranges of, 22–23
site tests in, 6
styles of, 22

1 0 8

I N D E X

Subﬂooring, cost of, 25
Survey, property, 5

Utilities on property form, 70
Utility easements, 7, 11

Tanks, buried, 6
Tempered-glass windows, 26
Title companies:
choice of, 17
disbursements through, 15–16
fee for, 16
Total construction cost,
disbursement costs and, 15
Trash, buried, 6
Trim:
budget for, 38–39
cost of, 28–29
upgrades in, 38–39
Turnkey houses, 41

Unbuildable sites, 7
Unﬁnished space, lending rates
for, 24
Upgrades:
builder’s proﬁt from, 41, 42
in cabinetry, 37
charges for, 43
in ﬂooring, 38
in millwork, 38
in plumbing ﬁxtures, 36
rule-of-thumb for, 37
in trim, 38–39
value of, 24
Utilities, budget for, 32–33

Value-added-costs (see Upgrades)
Vendors:
bids from, 42
blueprint copies for, 13
comparing estimates from
(see Preliminary construc-
tion estimates worksheets)
on cost detail form, 56
disbursements to, 15–19
restocking fees by, 43
schedule adjustments for, 61
schedule information from, 59–61

Waiver of lien form, 15–17, 19
in homeowner’s construction
workbook, 96
sample of, 17
Water rights, 7
Weather, as scheduling factor, 61
Well easements, 7
Who needs what form, 73
Windows:
bay, 35
cost of, 25–26
and cost of house, 35
tempered-glass, 26
Workbook (see Homeowner’s
construction workbook)
Working set (blueprints), 12

