Page 34

2
How a bridge affects river flow

2.1 Introduction

When a bridge is placed in a river it forms a narrowing of the natural channel and an obstacle
to the flow. This results in a loss of energy as the flow contracts, passes through the bridge
and then, most significantly, re -expands back to the full channel width. To provide the
additional head necessary to overcome the energy loss the upstream water level increases
above that which would be usually experien ced without the bridge. This additional head is
called the afflux, and its variation with distance upstream is called the backwater profile. The
smaller the opening, the greater the afflux and backwater.
One situation where a knowledge of bridge hydraulics is essential is when a new bridge is
to be built that obstructs the main river channel and/or encroaches onto the floodplain. The
construction of a hydraulically inefficient bridge could cause flooding upstream, or exacerbate
that which already occurs. T his would be extremely damaging and expensive if a large
number of properties or factories were flooded, so it is important that a hydraulically efficient
structure is designed and the backwater calculated accurately.
Sometimes the analysis may involve an existing bridge where flooding already occurs and
it is necessary to determine what proportion of this is attributable to the afflux from the
structure. First appearances can be deceptive. In many situations flooding, in the form of
overbank flow, would occur even if the bridge was not there. For instance, the small arch
bridge just visible in the centre of Fig. 2.1 looks as though it should be the cause of the
flooding but, although the afflux increases the depth and width of water on the floodplain, it is
actually the inadequacy of the river channel that is largely to blame.
When investigating whether or not a bridge is (or will be) the primary cause of flooding the
hydraulic capacity of the main river channel without the bridge (QR) should be compared with
the capacity of the bridge waterway (Qw) and the design flood (QDF). Then as a rough guide:

Page 35

Fig. 2.1 Upstream of Canns Mill Bridge during a 1 in 5 year flood (see also Fig. 2.15). The bridge is
in the centre of the photo. The width of the floodwater is about 55 m while the bridge span
is 4.3 m. The bridge appears to be responsible for the flooding, but only exacerbates it. The
primary cause is the low conveyance of the downstream channel. Much of the water on the
upstream floodplain is static overbank storage, a fact that must be recognised in any
hydraulic analysis. (Photo courtesy of G.A.McInally)

• if QR<Qw the bridge is relatively blameless;
• if QR<QDF i nundation of the floodplains would occur without the bridge;
• if Qw<QR the bridge forms an obstacle to flow and may cause or exacerbate flooding;
• if Qw<QDF the waterway is underdesigned;
• if Qw>QDF the waterway is overdesigned or has a margin of safety.
Although the above relationships are fairly logical, the extent of any flooding actually induced
by the bridge will depend upon such factors as the height of the banks and their freeboard,
whether normal or abnormal stages exist, the Froude number, and the severity of the
contraction.
The problem of analysing flow through a bridge often appears deceptively easy, perhaps
because it has been oversimplified by assuming a horizontal channel and flow at the normal
depth parallel to the bed. In reality the bed level will vary considerably so that the depth
becomes almost meaningless, while the flow may not be at the normal depth. Additionally,
some complex hydraulic phenomena are involved and there are many different types of

Page 36

flow that can occur at any particular bridge site, while identical bridges may perform
differently in different locations.
This chapter describes how the flow in a river is affected as it passes through a bridge, and
defines some basic variables such as afflux, head loss and energy loss. This is important: for
example, engineers not familiar with bridge hydraulics have been known to define the afflux
incorrectly. Chapter 3 describes the principal factors that significantly affect the hydraulic
performance of a bridge, while Chapters 4 and 5 outline various methods that can be
employed to obtain the afflux.

2.2 What happens when water flows through a bridge

If water flows through a constriction—that is, a section narrower than the natural river
channel—the water level is increased upstream of the constriction compared with that which
would otherwise exist (Kindsvater and Carter, 1955; Tracy and Carter, 1955). The backwater
extends upstream to section 0, at which point the constriction has no effect on the water level,
and uniform flow exists (Fig. 2.2a). The distance between the constriction and section 0
depends upon such factors as the geometry, roughness and slope of the channel, and can be
calculated using a backwater analysis (e.g. French, 1986; Hydrologic Engineering Center,
1990; Chadwick and Morfett, 1993). In the reach affected by the backwater the depth will be
greater than normal, so the velocity and energy loss are less than would otherwise occur.
Unless the constriction is very severe the flow is usually subcritical, with gradually varied
flow upstream and downstream of the structure and rapidly varying flow at the bridge.
When the opening is running free (i.e. not submerged) the water surface is drawn down as
it approaches the opening (of width or span b). This zone of drawdown approximates a
semicircle of radius b radiating from the centreline of the opening at the upstream face (Fig.
2.2b). Thus the maximum afflux is generally assumed to occur on the centreline of the
channel at one opening width (span) upstream of the upstream face of the constriction
(Kindsvater et al. 1953; Bradley, 1978). This is a simplification: the maximum afflux tends to
be nearer the upstream face when the contraction is slight and further upstream when it is
severe (Fig. 4.33). Additionally, with wide flooded valleys (of water surface width B) section
1 may be better located around 0.5 (B−b) upstream of the constriction. Nevertheless, for
simplicity and consistency the maximum affl ux will be assumed to occur one span upstream
from the bridge face at section 1.
After passing through section 1 the water surface is drawn down as it accelerates through
the opening, passing through normal depth at section 2 at (or near) the upstream fac e of the
bridge. The body of water in the centre of the channel experiences the greatest acceleration,
while deceleration occurs along the outer boundaries. This is significant for two reasons: first,
it results in the region of drawdown being roughly semicircular; second, sepa-

Page 37

Fig 2.2 (a) Diagrammatic longitudinal section of uniform flow at normal depth (YN) in a river channel
with (superimposed) the surface profile arising from the introduction of a bridge, (b) Plan
view showing how the flow separates and forms a vena contracta of width CCb. For clarity
the diagrams are not to scale.

ration occurs in the corners between the edge of the channel and the upstream face of the
constriction. The separation zone is delineated by a dashed line in Fig. 2.2b. Eddies may form
in the separation zone, especially when the opening has a small span relative to the width of
the river. The size of the zone depends upon the upstream channel characteristics and the
geometry of the constriction. An important point is that the water level in the separation zone
is higher than that in the region of drawdown, so the water level at the edge of the floodplain
may be significantly higher than at

Page 38

the centre of the channel. This transverse hydraulic gradient is needed to drive water off the
floodplain and through t he opening, especially where there are wide, rough floodplains.
Skewed openings also cause transverse gradients, the water being trapped in one corner
against the bridge face (see Fig. 3.8 and Section 3.7). This is most pronounced when the
channel slope is steep.
Although water approaching the bridge along the centre of the channel can pass through the
opening unimpeded, as the distance from the centreline increases the streamlines have to
curve ever more sharply inwards. Water flowing along the upstream abutments or approach
embankments has to curve particularly sharply, and this c an interfere with the main central jet
passing through the opening, a process that is very troublesome in extreme cases (Section 7.4
and Fig. 7.11). Another result of the inward curvature is that the ‘live’ stream continues to
contract as it passes through the opening so that it reaches a minimum width and depth at
section 3 (effectively a vena contracta, as for an orifice). Section 3 may be located either in
the opening or some distance downstream of it, the actual position depending upon the length
of the waterway and the downstream conditions, but for convenience it is usually assumed to
be at the downstream face of the constriction (Fig. 4.34). The width of the live stream can be
estimated as CC b, where CC is the dimensionless coefficient of contraction and b is the width
of the opening (m). Both the location and width of the vena contracta significantly influence
the energy loss and hydraulic performance (see Section 3.4).
The expansion of the live stream starts at the vena contracta and continues until the flow
fills the full width of the channel and normal conditions have been re -established at section 4.
There is no absolute rule regarding the location of section 4: the distance depends upon the
geometry of the channel, its roughness and the flow characteristics. HEC-2 suggests an
expansion of the jet at the rate of 1:4 (width: length) so the section would be located at least
2(B−b) from the downstream face (Hydrologic Engineering Center, 1990), but this is
questionable (Kaatz and James, 1997). Note that some computer models (e.g. WSPRO)
assume that section 4 is one span (b) downstream, so there are many variations. However, for
consistency it is alway s assumed in this book that section 4 is far enough downstream for
normal depth conditions to have been re -established and for the flow to be unaffected by the
bridge.
Downstream of the structure there is a large zone of separation (Fig. 2.2b). In all of the
zones of separation eddying occurs between the live stream and the side of the channel, but
this can be very pronounced downstream of the opening. Here, under appr opriate conditions,
the flow can be very turbulent with large eddies, and it is possible for the flow direction to be
backwards towards the constriction: that is, from right to left in Fig. 2.2. The line along which
separation occurs represents a shear boundary. As the jet expands, the shear causes a
deceleration of the jet, its width increasing in the direction of flow to maintain continuity of
discharge. The creation of

Page 39

eddies along the boundary results in lateral mixing of the two bodies of water until the
diffused jet occupies the whole channel. This process is aided by the existence of a deep,
slower-moving body of water downstream. The transfer of momentum from the jet to the
separation zone also results in the water in this zone being accelerated, entrained and carried
downstream by the mixing process.
The region of expanding flow is important since the greatest energy loss usually occurs
between the vena contracta and the section where the expansion ends. A rule of thumb is that
the energy loss due to the expansion is twice that of the contraction. In the expansion the high
rate of production of turbulence in the shear zones results in a large loss of e nergy that, when
added to the boundary shear loss, may lead to a total energy loss greater than the initial kinetic
energy of the jet (Laursen, 1970). To overcome this energy loss the water level increases
upstream of the structure, which is why afflux occurs.
The presence of wide, densely vegetated floodplains can significantly increase the
backwater arising from a constriction, perhaps even doubling it (Laursen, 1970; Bradley,
1978; Kaatz and James, 1997). In addition to the process described above, there is now a
significant flow from the floodplain into the main channel in order to pass through the
opening, followed by the expansion of the flow back onto the floodplain downstream. Laursen
called this accretion and abstraction respectively. In both cases an additional head of water is
needed to drive the tranverse flow. This is an important factor to remember when selecting a
method to calculate the afflux and when assessing the accuracy of the results (see also Section
4.6).
Figure 2.2a shows the water depth relative to a uniformly sloping bed. In real situations the
bed is often irregular so it is better to work in terms of the elevation above a datum (such as
ordnance datum) as in Fig. 2.3. This shows dia grammatically the longitudinal profile at a
bridge site resulting from uniform flow: that is, when the flow in the channel without the
bridge is constant at the normal depth (YN) as calculated from the Manning equation, for
example. For uniform flow to occur the discharge must be constant, and the channel, within a
sufficiently long reach, must have a uniform cross -section, a uniform surface roughness and a
uniform gradient. Skogerboe et al. (1973) pointed out that these stringent conditions suggest
that uniform flow at a bridge site may be the exception rather than the rule. Non-uniform flow
occurs if there is downstream control of water levels due to a severe bend, flood conditions at
a confluence between two streams, vegetation, tides or any sort of obstruction, including
another structure. In this case the usual water surface profile is a shallow curve, termed the
abnormal profile, lying above the normal depth line (Fig. 2.4). The backwater profile is
obtained by adding the bridge afflux to the abnormal profile. Obviously this is more
complicated since the abnormal profile is not parallel to the bed. Again, working to a datum
below bed level makes things easier.

Page 40

Fig. 2.3 Definition of afflux

Page 41

It should be appreciated that the bridge does not alter the elevation of the water surface or
the energy line at section 0, nor at section 4. By definition (in this book) these two sections
are located outside the reach affected by the structure. It is only between these two sections
that the values are changed as a result of the obstruction to flow.

2.3 Afflux, piezometric head loss and energy loss

Regardless of whether it is a proposed or existing bridge that is to be analysed, most hydraulic
investigations require an estimate of the chang e in water level caused by the structure. This
means that the afflux and the piezometric head loss are required. The energy loss includes a
consideration of the change in both the velocity head and the piezometric head. These
variables are defined below, while methods that can be used to evaluate them are described in
Chapters 3–5.

2.3.1 The uniform flow condition

Because it is the simplest, the uniform flow condition will be used initially to define and
illustrate the afflux and head loss across a bridge. For the situation shown in Fig. 2.2a, at any
particular discharge:

maximum afflux,

(2.1)

where Y1 is the water depth (m) at section 1 and YN is the normal depth (m). In reality the bed
is likely to have a variable slope and the depth of flow will not be constant, so a more widely
applicable definition is shown in Fig. 2.3. Here the elevation of the water surface above a
datum is used. Again the maximum afflux
is the difference in water level with and
without the bridge, but it is now apparent that

slope as in the diagrams, the fall in b ed level depends upon the distance between the two
points. The true head loss across the constriction is that measured between section 1 and
section 4, where the normal depth has been recovered (Fig. 2.3). Thus

Page 42

the energy line between two points, which again must be specified. The true energy loss
across a bridge is measured between sections 1 and 4: energy loss

Page 43

simple. Without the bridge the slope of the bed and the gradient of the water surface are not
equal, so the depth of water at the site varies wi th distance upstream of section 4 (Fig. 2.4).
Consequently if an existing bridge is being investigated this abnormal profile will have to be
computed from a backwate r analysis; if the bridge has not yet been constructed it can be
either measured in the field or calculated. The geometry of this longitudinal profile will
change with the discharge, but at any particular discharge

Page 44

Page 45

Fig. 2.6 Classification of some common types of flow through bridges. Y* is the stage needed to
submerge the waterway opening; usually Y*>1.1Z . The critical depth is Y C, which is higher
in the narrow opening.

Page 46

Fig. 2.6 Classification of some common types of flow through bridges (cont.) Y* is the stage needed
to submerge the waterway opening; usually Y*>1.1Z. The critical depth is YC , which is
higher in the narrow opening.

Page 47

channel or friction slopes, and low normal depth Froude numbers (eg F N<0.25). When
conducting a numerical analysis of drowned orifice flow it is essential that the opening is truly
submerged at both faces. This may only occur when both water levels exceed 1.1Z , where Z is
the height of the opening.
This type of flow is significant because it can result in a large afflux and head loss, and so
cause extensive flooding upstream, as illustrated in Section 2.6. It is inefficient, partly because
the waterway is flowing full resulting in a large boundary friction loss, and partly because
(unlike type 3 sluice gate flow) the water in the downstream channel is deep enough to
prevent the waterway from discharging freely. Equation 2.9 shows that with drowned orifice
flow the geometry of the opening (C d, aW), the difference in head across the structure (∆H)
and the depth of water in the downstream channel ( Yd) all affect the discharge (Q), so there is
a combination of structure and channel control.

Type 2
This is the transitional case between types 1 and 3. The flow is similar to type 1 except that
the outlet is not submerged, although the waterway is still running full. This means that the
friction loss is still relatively high.

Type 3
The upstream face of the opening is submerged but the water level is below soffit level at the
downstream face. This is frequently referred to as sluice gate flow, and can be evaluated using
an equation of this type (equation 2.8). The discharge through th e opening depends upon the
upstream water level (Yu) and the geometry of the opening, so structure control is dominant.
The downstream water level is irrelevant. The waterway is running only partially full so the
friction loss is reduced compared with type 2 flow. This condition frequently occurs when the
capacity of the opening is exceeded in channels with relatively steep bed or energy gradients
and FN> 0.25, or with flatter channels in the transition to flow types 2 and 1 (Hamill, 1997).
The head required for the opening to become permanently submerged is denoted by Y* in
Fig. 2.6 with Y*>1.1Z . Around this stage the upstream water level is usually extremely
turbulent and fluctuates considerably, resulting in the opening running alternately free and
submerged (Fig. 2.7). In this photograph, despite the horizontal soffit, the opening is
submerged at the sides but not at the centre, where the velocity head is large st. After
becoming permanently submerged there can be a rapid increase in upstream water level (Fig.
2.14). A helpful rule of thumb when trying to decide whether or not sluice gate flow will
occur at a site is that laboratory tests indicated that in channel flow ( type 4) normally about
one -half of the total fall of the

Page 48

Fig 2.7 There was some concern regarding the safety of this bridge at Camelford in June 1993. Note
the extreme turbulence as the opening starts to drown. This illustrates the difficulty of
measuring upstream water levels accurately and in determining the height required for an
opening to ensure a minimum freeboard of 0.6 m. (Reproduced by permission of Newquay
Press Service)

water surface from section 1 to 3 occurs between section 1 and the upstream face of the bridge
(Kindsvater and Carter, 1955). Often the maximum flood level at sections 1 and 3 can be
determined from trash marks.

Type 4
This is the subcritical channel flow condition that is most commonly encountered. The water
level is below the top of the opening at both the upstream and downstream face of the bridge.
The flow can be either at the normal depth or at an abnormal stage, but the depth is always
greater than the critical value (YC) that represents the start of supercritical flow.

Type 5
In this channel flow condition the water surface passes through the critical depth in the
opening indicating supercritical flow. No te that the

Page 49

critical depth is larger in the opening than in the river channel because the opening is
narrower. Thus supercritical flow often occurs first in the opening. This type of flow can be
very difficult to detect from a visual inspection of the site, because if the flow is only weakly
supercritical there will be no obvious hydraulic jump. In some instances it is possible to
calculate the critical depth ( Section 3.3.1) corresponding to a particular discharge and
compare this with observations made in the field, if there are any. Alternatively, it is possible
to calculate the width of constriction needed for flow to occur at the critical depth (Section
3.3).
Type 5 flow is more likely to occur (than type 4) when F N or the channel slope is relatively
large, the constriction is relatively severe, or perhaps when the opening is located
eccentrically in the channel. Flow types 5, 6 and 7 are significant because supercritical flow in
the waterway means that the upstream water level is now independent of the conditions
downstream.

Type 6
This is similar to type 5 except that the flow is supercritical in both the opening and the
channel immediately downstream of the bridge ( Fig. 2.8). In the more extreme cases (FN>2) it
may be possible to see clearly that the flow is supercritical because there may be a well -
developed hydraulic jump. The conditions associated with this type of flow are similar to
those described for type 5, only more severe. The problem of scour may now be quite acute.

Fig. 2.8 Type 6 supercritical flow in the opening and downstream channel. This bridge is eccentric to
the channel so there is a considerable flow along the upstream face of the right hand
abutment (on the left in the photo). This pushes the jet towards the left abutment, narrows
the vena contracta, and results in high velocities (see Fig. 7.11).

Page 50

Type 7
Supercritical flow now exists throughout the channel and opening, and a loss of energy results
in an increase in water level. This type of flow is rarely encountered but could occur in
mountainous regions or in smooth, steep, artificial channels.

Type 8
This type of flow occurs only when the capacity of the opening is gros sly exceeded and water
spills over the bridge deck and/or the approach embankments. Because all of the flow does
not now pass through the opening, this condition is not consistent with those described above
(which is why it was placed last). A different method of analysis is required, as described in
Chapter 6.
The eight types of flow above give rise to the important generic classification of subcritical
and supercrit ical flow. This is important not only because the hydraulic behaviours of these
two types of flow are different, but also because many model studies of bridge hydraulics
have not included supercritical flow at all. Crucially, it is usually more difficult to analyse the
supercritical condition and produce appropriate designs, while the phenomenon known as
‘choking’ can result in a much larger afflux than expected (see Section 3.3.3).
Another important generic classification is that of drowned orifice, sluice gate and open
channel flow with equations 2.7–2.10 (or similar) being used to analyse the stage-discharge
relationship. These equations are different in form, so it is essential to know what general type
of flow is being dealt with. For example, Fig. 2.9 illustrates how the velocity profile in a
laboratory channel (diagram a) is modified by the flow contraction that occurs at the entrance
to a bridge opening, in this case an arch. Even in channel flow the contraction has a radial
component that deflects the flow downwards so that the maximum relative velocity occurs
nearer to the bed (b and c). Once the stage is above soffit level, the contraction is most
pronounced in sluice gate flow (d). Many bridges have a scour pit just downstream because
the jet has a large velocity and a downward component as it emerges from the opening.
A knowledge of the flow type is important when designing works to improve the hydraulic
performance of a bridge and reduce flooding (see Chapter 7). For type 1 drowned orifice flow
with downstream control and an abnormal stage, some form of channel improvement below
the bridge may be most effective. This can result in an increased conveyance and reduced
stages at the bridge site. On the other hand, if a rounded entrance to the bridge waterway is to
be employed, this may be ineffective in channel flow, fairly effective with type 1 drowned
orifice flow, but very effective with type 3 sluice gate flow. This is because with type 3 flow
there is a large contraction from the soffit and a very uneven distribution of velocity within
the

Page 51

Fig. 2.9 Variation of proportional velocity with proportional depth: (a) in an unconstricted 450 mm
wide laboratory channel; (b) in the jet emerging from a 300 mm span model arch bridge
with Yu /Z=0.54 (three field measurements from Canns Mill Bridge are also shown); (c) in
the jet emerging from the 300 mm arch with Y u/Z=0.98; (d) in the jet emerging from the
300 mm arch with the opening submerged and experiencing drowned orifice flow and
sluice gate flow. Note how the radial contraction from the arch results in the maximum
velocity moving progressively closer to the bed.

opening, whereas with type 1 the whole opening is already being used and there is a more
uniform velocity distribution. This is apparent in Fig. 2.9d, which shows that in sluice gate
flow only about 50% of the jet emerging from the opening has a centreline proportional
velocity of 0.7 or more, whereas in drowned orifice flow about 85% of the jet has a
proportional velocity over 0.7. Thus it pays to know what type of flow is being dealt with.

2.5 Channel control and structure control

This is another generic classification that incorporates some of the factors described above.
The classification depends upon whether the stage and

discharge at the bridge site are controlled by the channel or by the structure. An example of
channel control (i.e. channel characteristics dominating) is a low stage at a bridge opening
that is almost as wide as the river so that the flow is practically unaffected. The stage-
discharge relationship for a channel experiencing uniform flow can be predicted using the
Manning equation:

Page 52

(2.7)

where Q is the discharge (m3/s), A (m2) is the cross-sectional area of flow in the channel, R
(m) is its hydraulic radius (=cross-sectional area/wetted perimeter), n (s/m1/3 ) is the Manning
roughness coefficient, and SF is the (dimensionless) slope of the energy line (friction gradient).
In uniform flow SF equals the bed slope, SO , but in non-uniform flow it does not. In American
texts using English units the (1/n) of equations 2.7 and 3.6 becomes (1.49/n).
Two features of channel control are that the stage- discharge curve is concave downwards
(Fig. 2.10), and that the bridge opening ratio (M) is an important factor in determining the
hydraulic performance of a bridge, as described in Section 3.2. Channel control can occur
with normal or abnormal stages, the latter being where a backwater from further downstream
controls water levels at the bridge site. A feature of abnormal stage channel control is that the
water level downstream of the bridge often increases more rapidly than that upstream. Under
these conditions the channel characteristics significantly influence the afflux and head loss.
Structure control occurs if an opening is very narrow and/or low so that the constriction
itself controls the flow and determines the upstream water level. In sluice gate flow where the
water level rises above the top of the opening, submerging or drowning the waterway, the
opening ratio (M) becomes unimportant so the discharge (Q) can be calculated from equation
2.8:

(2.8)

where C d is a dimensionless coefficient of discharge, aW is the total cross-sectional area (m2)
of the opening flowing full, g is the acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s2), Yu is the water
depth (m) on the centreline at an upstream cross -section (either the bridge face or one span
upstre am depending upon which has the largest stage), Z is the vertical height (m) of the
opening from mean bed level (that is, the height to the crown of an arch), au is the
dimensionless velocity distribution coefficient, and Vu is the mean upstream approach v elocity
(m/s). The discharge through the bridge is determined mainly by Yu and the geometry of the
waterway (i.e. C d, aW, Z), so the bridge controls the flow. In structure control the discharge
and

Page 53

Fig. 2.10 Stage-discharge curves for an unconstricted 450 mm wide laboratory channel and a 250 mm
span model bridge with a rectangular opening. The channel curve is concave downwards
while, after submergence, the bridge curve is concave upwards. These curvatures are
characteristic of channel and structure control. The vertical difference between the curves is
the afflux.

upstream water level are independent of the conditions in the downstream channel. However,
when sluice gate flow is just becoming established, the conditions in the channel may still
have an influence on the upstream stage, but this influence diminishes as Yu increases.
A feature of structure control is that the upstream stage (Yu) increases more quickly than
that downstream (the two are not related). Another is that the stage—discharge curve is
usually concave upwards after the upstream water level has risen above the soffit of the
bridge; channel flow

Page 54

is concave downwards (Fig. 2.10). The curvature can be a useful way of identifying the flow:
at some sites it may not always be clear whether the flow is controlled by the channel or by
the structure, and there may be an indistinct transition zone. This often occurs on a rising or
falling stage when the flow alternates between channel flow and sluice gate flow, and neither
is really established. The vertical difference between the two stage-discharge lines is the
afflux caused by the bridge.
The shape of the lines in Fig. 2.10 is easy to explain. With respect to equation 2.7, A=BY
where B is the width of the channel (m) and Y is the depth of flow (m); if a wide rectangular
channel is assumed so that R can be approximated by Y , then ignoring the other variables the
equation reduces to Q αY5/3 . On the other hand, with equation 2.8 it can be assumed that the
area of the opening, a w, is constant so basically Q αY1/2 . Spend a moment plotting the graphs
of these two relationships and they will have the curvature described above.
When both the upstream and downstream water levels are above the top of the opening the
flow is of the drowned orifice type and can be described by an equation of the form

Q=CdaW (2g∆H)1/2

where

(2.9)

(2.10)

and Yd is the downstream water depth (m) at the centre of the opening. The conditions
associated with drowned orifice flow are such that the velocity head is often negligibly small
so the differential head can be taken as ∆H = (Yu−Yd). There is always some degree of both
structure and channel control since both the geometry of the opening (i.e. Cd, aW ) and ∆H
(which includes Yd) affect the discharge through the bridge.
Typical values of the discharge coefficients (Cd) for use with equations 2.8 and 2.9 are
shown in Figs. 2.11 and 2.12. These have been derived from several sources (Bradley, 1978;
Hamill and Mclnally, 1990; Hamill, 1997). The diagrams show the range of values applicable
to various types of bridge; it would be wrong to assume that at any stage there is a single
value that can be adopted. Remember that the transition from channel flow to submerged flow
is always unpredictable until Yu>>1.1Z or Z/Yu< 0.9.
As a further example of a few of the things discussed in this chapter, imagine a laboratory
channel that is supplied with water by a pump. The slope of the channel can be altered, while
the depth of flow can be adjusted by raising or lowering a tailgate at the end of the channel.
Suppose that initially the tailgate and slope are set so that uniform channel flow at a constant
normal depth is obtained as in Figs 2.2a and 2.3. If everything remains the same except that
the tailgate is raised to create a backwater, there will now be an abnormal stage as in Fig. 2.4.
It is the same bridge operating at

Page 55

Fig. 2.11 Coefficients of discharge (Cd) for sluice gate flow. Below Yu /Z=1.1 submerged flow is not
established, and the results are unreliable. The results are from Bradley (1978), Hamill and
McInally (1990), and Hamill (1997).

Fig. 2.12 Coefficients of discharge (Cd) for drowned orifice flow. Below Yu /Z=1.1 or Z/Yu=0.9
submerged flow is not established and the results are unreliable. The results are from
Bradley (1978), Hamill and McInally (1990) and Hamill (1997).

the same discharge, but the afflux is different and the method of analysis would have to be
different. Note that under these conditions, if the depth of flow and bed slope are used to
calculate the discharge from the Manning equation, the answer would be too large. With non -
uniform flow, the slope

Page 56

of the energy line (the friction gradient) must be used in the Manning equation, not the bed
slope.
Continuing the above example, if the tailgate is raised progressively, eventually the bridge
opening will become submerged by the backwater so that type 1 drowned orifice flow is
established. This would require yet another method of analysis. As observed earlier, identical
bridges experiencing the same discharge may exhibit very different types of flow and
hydraulic behaviour.

2.6 Case study: Canns Mill Bridge

Canns Mill Bridge is located on the River Dalch in Devon ( Fig. 2.1). It is a single-span
segmental arch structure with a waterway opening approximately 4.28m wide, 1.8m high and
3.35m long. The segmental arch springs from vertical abutments approximately 0.6m high.
During the course of the investigation a number of floods caused slight scouring of the bed so
that the height of the arch above mean bed level increased to 1.9m (which explains why a
different but equally correct figure may be used later).
The channel approaching the bridge is quite straight and steep, having a gradient of about
1:60. However, the downstream channel has an adverse gradient as a result of a scour pit: that
is, it slopes towards the bridge for the first 12m or so before beginning to fall in the direct ion
of flow (Fig. 2.13). After this the river channel is tortuous and overgrown so that it provides a
control on water levels at the bridge during flood, resulting in abnormal stages.
The hydraulic performance of the bridge was investigated by locating pressure transducers
in stilling tubes at four locations, as shown in Figs 2.13 and 2.15. All transducer readings
were checked against staff gauges located adjacent to the stilling tubes. The transducer
readings were recorded at 15 minute intervals by an intelligent outstation (Mclnally and
Hamill, 1987). Additional manual measurements were made at the faces of the bridge. The
river discharge was measured by velocity meter gauging from the bridge, and the results
checked against a mathematical model of the site.
The largest event recorded was about 15 m3 /s, which caused the water level to rise 0.76m
above the upstream soffit of the bridge, equivalent to Yu /Z=1.4. This level is indicated by the
white mark on the bridge face in Fig. 2.15. Typically a shallow standing wave formed against
the face, moving further upstream as the degree of submergence increased. At the downstream
face the water level was probably around 0.2m above the downstream soffit of the bridge
(which is higher than the upstream soffit). There was significant overbank flow both upstream
and downstream of the bridge, but no bypass flow around it. This study provided some
reliable and accurate water level and discharge data (Hamill and McInally, 1990).

Page 57

Fig. 2.13 Longitudinal section through Canns Mill bridge showing the profile of the water surface at
various discharges. Until submergence the site is controlled by an abnormal stage arising
downstream, so the depth initially increases more rapidly downstream than upstream.

The longitudinal profile of the water surface observed during a series of floods in November
1986 is shown in Fig. 2.13. At low flows the water surface has a relatively uniform gradient
throughout the site. At medium stages (type 4 flow) a backwater from further downstream
reduces the slope of the water surface and the depth is greater downstream than upstream,
indicating typical non -uniform flow behaviour associated with abnormal stages and channel
control. The normal depth Froude number at Canns Mill is difficult to estimate accurately
because of the compound channel (see Section 3.3) but is around 0.3, more or less on the
boundary between sluice gate and drowned orifice flow. Thus at higher stages with the
opening permanently submerged flow types 3, 2, and 1 occur. With structure contro l
established, there is a larger increase in depth upstream than downstream.
The hydraulic performance of the bridge is illustrated nicely by the relationship between
the head loss and the discharge (Fig. 2.14 and Table 2.1 ). The head loss is small until just
before the opening becomes permanently submerged, after which it increases rapidy. The line
gets steeper as type 3 flow changes to type 2 and then type 1. Type 1 and 2 flow usually result
in a relatively large afflux and head loss.
Prior to submergence of the waterway, the river channel rather than the bridge was the
primary cause of flooding, after which the afflux added up

Page 58

Fig. 2.14 The relationship between the piezometric head loss from gauge 1 to 4 and the discharge at
Canns Mill. The head loss increases rapidy after the opening submerges and flow types 3 , 2
and 1 occur.

Table 2.1 Observed head loss and afflux at Canns Mill according to flow type

Discharge (m 3/s)

Head loss 1−4 (mm)

Afflux (mm) Flow type

2.4
4.5
5.8
7.0
8.3
9.5
10.8
12.5
13.8
15.0

8
3
3
27
60
90
123
200
264
330

3 Open channel—channel control
5
11
17
45 Sluice gate—structure control
72
115
175 Drowned orifice
220
270

Page 59

Fig. 2.15 Canns Mill after the flood, showing the water level gauges and flood height (the white mark
on the bridge parapet).

to 270 mm to the upstream stage. Thus severe flooding would occur without the bridge. This
again demonstrates the need to fully understand the nature of a site and the prevailing flow
conditions before considering either improvement works or a replacement bridge.

References

Bradley, J.N. (1978) Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways, 2nd edn, US Department of
Transportation/Federal Highways Administration, Washington DC.
Chadwick, A. and Morfett, J. (1993) Hydraulics in Civil and Environmental Engineering, 2nd edn, E
& FN Spon, London.
French, R.H. (1986) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.
Hamill, L. (1997) Improved flow through bridge waterways by entrance rounding. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 121, March, 7–21.
Hamill, L. and Mclnally, G.A. (1990) The hydraulic performance of two arch bridges during flood.
Municipal Engineer, 7, October, 241–256.
Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) (1990) HEC -2 Water Surface Profile Users Manual, US Army
Corps of Engineers, Davis, CA.
Kaatz, K.J. and James, W.P. (1997) Analysis of alternatives for computing backwater at bridges.
American Society of Civil Engineers , Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 123 (9), 784–792.

Page 60

Kindsvater, C.E. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Tranquil flow through open -channel constrictions.
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 955–992.
Kindsvater, C.E., Carter, R.W. and Tracy, H.J. (1953) Computation of peak discharge at contractions.
Circular 284, United States Geological Survey, Washington DC.
Laursen, E.M. (1970) Bridge backwater in wide valleys. Proceedings of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, Journal o f the Hydraulics Division, 96 (HY4), 1019–1038.
Mclnally, G.A. and Hamill, L. (1987) Telemetry systems for research and practice. Proceedings of the
British Hydrology Society, National Hydrology Symposium 1987, pp. 27.1–27.6.
Skogerboe, G.V., Barrett, J.W.H., Walker, W.R. and Austin, L.H. (1973) Comparison of bridge
backwater relations. Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the
Hydraulics Division, 99 (HY6), 921–938.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Backwater effects of open channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 993–1018.

