Page 1

1
Putting things into perspective

1.1 Why study bridge hydraulics?

Many people, indeed many engineers, who are not familiar with the subject imagine that
constructing a bridge across a river is entirely a problem in structural engineering. They
assume that the bridge opening can be made so large that it will completely span the river at
such a height that floodwater will never rise anywhere near the deck. If this was always true
there would be little need to study bridge hydraulics, but in reality things are rarely this simple.
Economics often dictate the length of span and therefore how many piers have to be located in
the river. Similarly economics, the geography of the site or the nature of the crossing (such as
a railway line with a fixed vertical profile as in Fig. 1.1) may impose some restriction on the
maximum permissible elevation of the deck. Consequently flood levels may rise to deck
height or above. What initially appeared to be an elementary problem turns out to be quite
complicated.
So why study bridge hydraulics? Four answers quickly spring to mind.
• Nobody can be allowed to build a new bridge that has piers and /or abutments in a river
without first being able to prove by calculation or modelling that the resulting backwater
will not cause, or significantly exacerbate, flooding of land and property upstream. This is
becoming increasingly important as the demand f or building land leads to construction on
river floodplains that, by definition, are already prone to flooding.
• At locations where there is an existing bridge and significant flooding, an analysis may be
required to determine how much of the flooding is caused by the bridge and how much by
other factors—such as simply too much floodwater to be carried within the river channel. If
the analysis shows the bridge to be at fault, then this may be sufficient justification to
construct a new structure.
• If it is known that a bridge provides a significant obstacle to flow and is responsible for
much of the flooding that occurs, with a knowledge of bridge hydraulics it may be possible
to design improvement works that will help to alleviate the problem.

Page 2

Fig. 1.1 Exwick rail bridge; part of the flood relief channel at Exeter, Devon. Note the rounded soffit
and abutments, and elongated piers. A physical hydraulic model study of the scheme was
undertaken, and this is to be recommended whenever novel designs or complex flows are
involved.

• In addition to the nature and geometry of the river channel, the shape, spacing and
orientation of the bridge piers and abutments will affect the flow through a bridge and the
likelihood of scouring of the bed. Well designed bridges are not immune to this problem,
while bridges that are badly designed hydraulically are even more likely to fail and collapse.
Section 1.3 illustrates that this can have tragic consequences. How can a good design be
obtained without a knowledge of bridge hydraulics?
This book is concerned with the hydraulic analysis and design of bridge waterway openings.
It covers both single and multispan bridges with either rectangular or arched waterways. It is
based on a century or more of study and research by investigators all over the world, most
notably in North America. It can be used to estimate how a bridge, existing or proposed, will
alter water levels at a site at any particular discharge. Conversely, it can be used to calculate
the discharge from the obs erved water levels. It can be employed to analyse and design
modern bridges with relatively long rectangular spans, or to investigate the hydraulic
performance of the old masonry arch structures that are still numerous in many parts of the
world. Other top ics covered include how to improve the flow through a bridge, and how to
evaluate and alleviate the problem of scouring of the foundations.

Page 3

It is a tribute to past generations of engineers that bridges that were built for horses and
carts, sometimes many centuries ago, are still standing and able to carry modern traffic.
However, although the mode of transport may have changed, some of the problems faced by
bridge engineers are timeless.

1.2 Early developments in bri dge hydraulics

Possibly the earliest permanent river bridge of any significance was built somewhere between
810 and 700 BC across the River Euphrates at Babylon (Overman, 1975). The bridge was
around 120 m long with stone piers 10m wide and 22m in length. A timber deck spanned
between the piers, although parts of this were removed at night to stop thieves crossing from
one side of the city to the other! The piers were built in the shape of boats, pointing upstream
to reduce the resistance to flow. This ear ly example of applied bridge hydraulics was probably
a logical extension of the practice of using boats lashed together to form floating bridges.
A form of floating bridge was used by Xerxes in 480 BC to span the 1400m wide
Hellespont, which joins the Black and Aegean Seas, so that his army could invade Greece.
When a violent storm destroyed one of the two bridges, Xerxes ordered that the Hellespont
should receive 300 lashes and have a pair of fetters thrown into it. He also ordered that the
men responsible for building it should have their heads cut off, which is a rather severe form
of professional liability by modern standards!
The Romans probably represent the finest early bridge engineers, the quality of their road
network being apparent even today. They recognised that beam bridges had a limited span,
and so employed semicircular arches of up to 30m. They knew how to build cofferdams and
drive piles. A good example of their work is the bridge in Rome now called the Ponte Molle,
which was built in 109 BC. Although the bridge was restored in 1808, four of its original
arches, the largest spanning 25.7m, are still standing. The bridge was used during the Second
World War to carry tanks across the Tiber.
The Romans did not develop the segmental or elliptical arch, which makes larger spans
practical. These came much later. They were restricted to the semicircular arch, which has the
advantage that there is no lateral thrust to the piers. They did, however, realise that if the piers
had cutwaters or starling s that were pointed at both ends (instead of boat shape) then there
were fewer eddies downstream of the structure so its hydraulic efficiency was improved.
Roman engineering was so good it is something of a surprise to see engravings of the first
stone br idge to be built over the Thames at London between 1176 and 1209. The most striking
features are the houses, shops and chapel built on the bridge, combined with the narrowness
of the openings (Fig. 1.2). The bridge had 20 arches with spans that varied between 3.0m and
9.6m. Most of the piers were about 5.5m wide and were surrounded by starlings to a little
above low water level, so that the total width

Page 4

of the openings was only about 59.7m between the starlings and 137.2m above them, while
the river was 282.2m wide (Ruddock, 1979). This is an opening ratio of 0.21 and 0.49
between and above the starlings respectively. Typically, the piers of Roman bridges were on ly
a quarter of the width of the river, giving an opening ratio of 0.75. A ratio of 1.0, of course,
represents an unconstricted channel. Thus London Bridge represented quite an obstacle to the
flow of the river, and this gave rise to the famous ‘fall’ or difference in water level across the
structure. The fall terrified the London boatmen, understandably so since it was measured at
up to 1.45m around the year 1736. However, the fall had its uses. In the eighteenth century
water -wheels were placed in four of the openings and used to drive pumps that supplied the
city with water. For this reason an Act of Parliament forbade anyone to reduce the fall, even
though the rush of water through the openings was so great that there was a constant danger of
the piers being damaged or undermined and the bridge collapsing. By 1800 this problem had
become so acute that a Select Committee of the House of Commons recommended
replacement, and this new bridge was officially opened in 1831. Despite its many faults, the
old bridge had lasted over 600 years.
Notwithstanding its longevity, old London Bridge illustrates nicely that narrow openings
and wide piers result in high waterway velocities, a large fall across the structure, scour, and
damage. It also shows that British bridge building had progressed little over the centuries. On
the other hand, the French had established the Corps des Ingénieurs des Ponts et Chaussées

Fig. 1.2 London Bridge was built between 1176 and 1209. The openings are only about half the width
of the river, and vary in shape and size. Houses and shops line the bridge. (Copyright ©
The Musuem of London)

Page 5

by 1720 and the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées by 1747. When it was proposed in 1734 that a
new bridge should be built across the Thames at Westminster, there were few engineers in
Britain that were qualified for such a task. Therefore it i s no great surprise that it was a
Frenchman who calculated the fall through both old London Bridge and the proposed
Westminster Bridge. This was probably one of the first times that such a calculation had been
made but, although apparently accurate, it was of limited value because few laymen or
engineers of the day could understand it. In his excellent book, Ruddock (1979) suggested
that the method used must have been similar to that described by Robertson in 1758.
Adopting modern notation and terminology, this was as follows.
If the depth is constant, the continuity equation becomes

where B is the width of the river channel, b is the total width of the bridge openings, and V1
and V2 are the corresponding flow velocities. Recognising that the live stream will contract
between the piers, a coefficient of contraction with a value of 0.84 was introduced (based on
observations by Isaac Newton of flow through sharp-edged orifices). Thus

(1.1)

Page 6

was so little advance, o r even a regression, from Roman times. The situation was better in
France, where the Frères du Pont (Brotherhood of the Bridge) were at least as good as the
Romans. Between 1178 and 1188 they constructed what was at the time the longest stone arch
river br idge, the Pont d’Avignon across the Rhone. The largest of the 21 spans was 32.5 m.
However, the arches were pointed like church windows, so they were wasteful and expensive.
This style is typical of the period, and can be seen in Bishop Skirlaw’s fifteenth -century
bridge across the Tees at Yarm (Fig. 1.3).
To be economical and efficient the arches of a bridge should be as long and as flat as
possible. Consequently the use of segmental arches by Taddeo Gaddi in 1345 for the Ponte
Vecchio in Florence, Italy, was a major step forward. With segmental arches the abutments
have to withstand a lateral thrust, the thrust being balanced at the piers. In 1371 a single
segmental arch with a span of 71 m was built over the Trezzo River near Milan. This span
was the longest ever built, a record that was to stand for 400 years. The ability to bridge large
distances with a single span, or a few large spans, made things much easier from the point of
view of bridge hydraulics, although the structural problems increased and many bridges
collapsed.

Fig. 1.3 The original fifteen th century part of this bridge across the tidal River Tees at Yarm has
characteristic pointed arches (nearest the camera). It was constructed with a road width of
about 3.7 m, but this was increased in 1806, the ‘join’ just being visible. The combination
of a spate in the river with a high tide has frequently resulted in the town being flooded to a
depth of several metres, notably in 1771 and 1881.

Page 7

Advances in bridge hydraulics came rather slowly, and it was not until the completion of
the Pont No tre Dame in 1507 that a new feature was introduced. This was due to the ingenuity
of a French priest, Giovanni Giocondo, who by increasing the span of an arch towards its
edges was able to spring the arch from nearer the pointed ends of the piers. This resulted in a
wider bridge for a given pier size. The same technique has also been used to widen existing
bridges. However, the ‘rounding’ of the edge of the arch also gave better hydraulic
characteristics. This feature became known as cornes de vâche because it looks as though the
central piers have cow’s horns. Chamfers on the voussoirs were used by Thomas Telford on
the Over Bridge at Gloucester (1826–1830) and at Morpeth to bridge the River Wansbeck
(1831). In the former case it was to help pass the frequent large floods that occur in the Severn,
while at Morpeth the low street levels and restricted width between the existing river walls
made a hydraulically efficient bridge desirable (Fig. 1.4). Possibly Telford also liked the
architectural effect of this feature.
In 1720 the Corps des Ingénieurs des Ponts et Chaussées was given the responsibility of
developing France’s roads, which led to the creation of a special college, the Ecole des Ponts
et Chaussées, in 1747. This effectively created the first civilian civil engineers and established
France as a leader in the field of bridge building. Chief Engineer of the Corps was Jean
Rodolphe Perronet, who in 1774 used five elliptical arches of 36 m span for the Pont de
Neuilly over the Seine in Paris. This enabled even longer flatter spans to be constructed, and
with this bridge the piers were only one -ninth of the arch width, so the opening ratio must
have been about 0.89.
The next significant hydraulic development appears to have been on the Sarsfield Bridge
(formerly Wellesley Bridge) built by Alexander Nimmo

Fig. 1.4 Thomas Telford’s 1831 bridge over the River Wansbeck at Morpeth, Northumberland. Note
the cornes de vâche at the arch springings.

Page 8

between 1824 and 1835 at Limerick in Ireland. Nimmo curved the whole soffit of the arch,
making the opening higher on the outside edges than in the centre. This made it more
streamlined and enabled it to pass more easily the spring tides that rise part of the way up the
arch. Modern equivalents are shown in Figs 1.1 and 7.1.
In 1826 Thomas Telford’s Menai Strait Bridge was opened. This was the world’s first great
suspension bridge, having a span of 174m. In a way it marks a turning point, because after
this civil engineering had advanced sufficiently to provide an effective alternative to
multispan masonry bridges with their attendant hydraulic problems, although it could be
argued that this distinction goes to the world’s first cast iron bridge built by Abraham Darby
in 1777. This spanned 30m across the Severn at Coalbrookdale in England. Of course stone
bridges continued to be built until perhaps the 1930s in Britain. Today over 1000 ma sonry
arch bridges remain in the county of Devon (George, 1982) with a further 400 or so in
Cornwall. Many of these are quite old, with around 310 bridges in the two counties being
either scheduled as ancient monuments or listed as buildings of architectural or historical
importance. These bridges are protected and have to be looked after. The total number of
preserved arch bridges in Britain must be quite large.
When the first major reinforced concrete bridge with two 69m spans was built in 1904 in
Germany, the days of masonry arch bridges became numbered. Reinforced concrete or
prestressed concrete river bridges with rectangular openings have become the norm, although
to most people they lack the charm and individuality of the old arch bridges—so much so that
in the more environmentally aware Britain of the 1990s public opinion has resulted in the
construction of one or two new masonry arch bridges (Fig. 1.5), even though this was not
necessarily the cheapest option. However, the twentieth century remains dominated by
reinforced concrete.
The end of the era in which the construction of arch bridges was common more or less
coincided with the start of serious research into bridge hydraulics. In 1840, d’Aubuisson
published a work in Paris containing an equation for flow through a bridge. In America,
Nagler (1918) and Lane (1921) published significant contributions to the subject, to be
followed by Yarnell (1934) and many others. They established the subject that is developed in
this book, and it is easy to forget the difficulties that they faced. At the start of the twentieth
century the subject of fluid mechanics or hydraulics was not as advanced as it is now.
Additionally, the instruments available were simple and, by modern standards, crude.
However, many of the principles of applied bridge hydraulics that they pioneered are equally
valid today and can still be found in modern practice.
While many old bridges are still in regular use, it is wrong to think that all bridges built by
our recent ancestors stood for centuries. For instance, the iron bridge constructed at Yarm in
1805 to replace Bishop Skirlaw’s crashed into the river in 1806 before it had even been
opened to tr affic.

Page 9

Fig. 1.5 This new three -span masonry bridge across the River Esk at Egton Bridge, North Yorkshire,
was opened in 1994, replacing an unattractive 1930s steel structure. The bridge is an exact
replica of the original 1758 structure, two spans of which were destroyed by flood in 1930.

Consequently the old stone bridge was widened, and is still in use (Fig. 1.3). Some were
washed away during construction; others collapsed. Only the best examples of the bridge
builders’ work usually survives but, regardless of age, the possibility of failure is ever present.

1.3 Hydraulic causes of bridge failure

Smith (1976, 1977) studied 143 bridge failures that occurred throughout the world between
1847 and 1975. He grouped the causes of failure into nine categories, as shown in Table 1.1.
Almost half of the failures were due to floods. One flood can wash away the foundations of a
large number of bridges at the same time, particularly small structures. Perhaps the table also
shows that engineers pay more attention to structural design than they do to hydraulic
considerations? Or perhaps, since the excess flow may bypass the bridge as discussed in
Chapters 6 and 8, the most severe consequences of the design flood being exceeded are scour
and foundation failure? Either way the table illustrates the importance of appropriate
hydraulic design if a bridge is to stand for centuries. The design process is considered in
Section 1.4.
White et al. (1992) commented on bridge failures in the USA and observed that the most
common cause was floods and the other actions of water. More specif ically, two factors were
identified: one was scour, and the second was debris piled against the structure. Sometimes
these two factors can

Table 1.1 Causes of bridge failure, 1847–1975 (after Smith, 1976, 1977). Except in the remarks
column, secondary causes are omitted: each failure is listed once

Page 10

Cause of failure

Flood and foundation movement

Unsuitable or defective permanent
material or workmanship
Overload or accident
Inadequate or unsuitable temporary
works or erection procedure
Earthquake
Inadequate design in permanent
material
Wind
Fatigue
Corrosion
Total number of failures

Number of
failures

Comments

70 66 scour; two earth slips; one floating debris;
one foundation movement
22 19 by brittle fracture of plates or anchor bars

14 10 ship or barge impact
12 Inadequacy in permanent design a
supplementary cause in one instance

11
5

4
4 Three cast iron; one hastened by corrosion
1
143

Reproduced with permission, Institution of Civil Engineers

be interrelated. Of the two, damage caused by scouring of the bottom material around the
foundations tends to be the most prevalent. A study conducted in 1973 showed that of 383
bridge failures caused by catastrophic floods, 25% involved pier damage and 72% involved
abutment damage. A more extensive study in 1978 showed that scour at bridge piers was just
as significant as scour at the abutments. In 1985, in Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia,
73 bridges were destroyed by flooding, including scour. During the floods in spring 1987, 17
bridges in New York and New England were damaged or destroyed by scour.
Scour in its widest sense may also include lateral erosion of the riverbanks in the vicinity of
a bridge (Fig. 1.6). This may result in the flow approaching the bridge at a skewed angle
instead of perpendicularly, greatly increasing the potential for failure of the piers, abutments
and highway embankments. In one survey of 224 bridges in the USA it was discovered that
106 sites (47%) had hydraulic problems as a result of lateral stream erosion (Brice, 1984).
Accumulation of debris was a problem at 26 sites (12%), with many more experiencing some
form of scour.
Between 1964 and 1984 around 46 bridges were seriously damaged by

Page 11

Fig. 1.6 Lateral erosion downstream of the railway viaduct at Fenny Bridges, Devon, in July 1968.
The line of the original river bank is shown by the dashes. Changes of this type can
significantly alter the angle at which the flow hits the piers and thus affect scour depths.
(Reproduced by permission of the Environment Agency)

flood action in Devon and Cornwall, and a further 13 were actually destroyed (Hamill and
O’Leary, 1985). This is a significant number, but with over 5000 bridges in the two counties it
represents a relatively small proportion of the total. Thus bridge failures are thankfully rare,
but not uncommon. There are around 60 counties in Britain, so the figures for Devon and
Cornwall can be used to gain some idea of the national picture. It should also be remembered
that Britain’s climate is relatively moderate compared with some parts of the world. When
typhoon Fran hit Kyushu in Japan in 1976, giving 1.95m of rainfall, a record at that time, the
result was 233 bridges washed away, 133 fatalities and 337 injured (Holford, 1977).
It is instructive to see what lessons can be learnt from these failures. The evidence suggests
that there were three principal factors involved, either singly or in combination: an
inadequately sized opening, scour, and the accumulation of flood debris.

1.3.1 Inadequate waterway openings

There is no universally applicable definition of what constitutes an inadequate opening, but if
a bridge is seriously damaged or destroyed by flood

Page 12

then possibly the bridge waterway was not large enough. Regular flooding upstream may also
indicate that the opening should be larger.
Most of the damage and destruction experienced i n Devon and Cornwall has been the result
of a small number of extreme storms. For instance, in July 1968 10 bridges were destroyed
and a further 19 damaged (Criswell, 1968; George, 1982). The waterway openings of the
bridges were too narrow so that the res ulting water velocities could easily remove the
sedimentary bed materials and erode the foundations. In general, the smaller and older bridges
were the worst affected. In August 1952 the catastrophic flood at Lynmouth damaged or
destroyed 28 bridges, the openings being too small for the flood flows (Fig. 1.7). The two
rivers, the East and West Lyn, that flow into Lynmouth have gradients of 1 in 25 and 1 in 8 as
they approach the town. With an estimated combined flow of 700m 3/s from a catchment of
only 101 km 2, what were normally small streams turned into raging torrents carrying large
boulders and other flood debris. No wonder the bridge openings were insufficient. The force
of the floodwater must have been enormous. A 7.5 tonne boulder was found in the basement
of a hotel. The tremendous battering received by the bridges combined with water levels that
rose above the top of the waterways not surprisingly led to damage and destruction. When
five of the larger waterways were replaced,

Fig. 1.7 Lynmouth, Devon, after the flood of August 1952. A reminder never t o underestimate the
power of water. Note the boulders piled against the Lyndale Hotel to a depth of around 9 m,
and the water staining on the walls. Midway between the camera and the hotel are many
human figures and a bulldozer, which gives some sense of scale. (Reproduced by
permission of the Western Morning News, Plymouth)

Page 13

each had the width and height of span increased by a factor of 2 or 3 (George, 1982).
The magnitude of the Lynmouth flood was something of a shock for British hydrologists.
With 34 lives lost, 93 houses destroyed or later demolished as unsafe and 300–400 people
rendered homeless, the event illustrated the unpredictability and power of nature. For bridge
engineers it raised the question as to what magnitude and frequency of flood event a waterway
should be designed for. This was not a new question. In 1811 Telford confessed that he could
not ensure the safety of bridges in the Highlands of Scotland from the maximum spates he
was beginning to think were possible (Ruddock, 1979). If he did it would be uneconomic. In
1812 he observed that ‘…it is only by degrees that the proper dimensions for a bridge can be
ascertained’, and ‘The bridges now built will serve for a scale of measurement, each for its
own river.’
These words are still true almost 200 years later. With climatic change possibly occurring,
the prediction of floods is a risky business. It appears that large floods may happen more
frequently than first thought. In 1982 George considered Devon floods and the waterways of
bridges, and suggested the guidelines in Table 1.2. In the discussion arising from this paper,
Canadian guidelines were quoted as ranging between 1 in 200 years for long freeway bridges
to 1 in 25 years for short local bridges. George also recommended that due consideration
should be given to the maximum historical flood, and to the possibility of unusual types of
flood occurring. For the purpose of assessing the waterway area required to cope with the
design flood, the Lacey relationship for alluvial channels (equation 1.5) was said to be
surprisingly good as a check on opening width (Neill, 1973), although local factors must also
be considered.
As far as the height of the opening is concerned, it has been suggested that the soffit should
be 0.6 –1.0m above the design flood level, or on minor watercourses 600mm above the highest
known stage (Brandon, 1989; Richardson et al., 1993; Highways Agency, 1994). This is
easier than it sounds given the difficulty of calculating the design water level and the fact that
the water surface may not be flat but consist of waves superimposed on a transverse slope,
particularly if the bridge and approach embankments are skewed (Fig. 2.7 and Section 3.7). If
there is no restriction on height

Table 1.2 Suggested return intervals for bridge waterways based on Devon floods

Category

Immediately downstream of a community
Motorways and trunk roads
Other roads in rural areas
Submersible bridges (pipe bridges)

After George (1982)

Flood interval (years)

1 in 1000 years
1 in 150 years
1 in 30 years
1 in 5 years

Page 14

then, given that the frequency of major floods may be underestimated, the higher the better.
There is then less risk of debris becoming stuck, flooding upstream and damage to the bridge
(see Appendix A).
Of course, a bridge does not have to be damaged or destroyed before it is considered to
have an inadequate waterway opening. If the opening is so small that it acts like a retarding
dam and causes the inundation of a large residential or commercial area upstream then the
bridge can hardly be considered to be adequate, even if it survives the flood unscathed (Fig.
1.8). Additionally, if the quantity of water stored by a bridge and embankment exceeds
25000m 3 above the natural level of any part of the adjacent land, then in Britain reservoir
safety legislation applies (HMSO, 1975), and the bridge and embankment have to be designed
as a dam and inspected by suitably qualified engineers throughout their life, increasing costs
significantly. Although 2500 0m3 sounds like a large volume, it is only a depth of 2.0m on
floodplains 60m wide and 209m long, which can be achieved easily. To avoid this the
waterway must be made large enough to pass the design discharge with floodplain storage
kept below the critica l value or, alternatively, the approach embankments should be designed
to allow excess flow to pass over them (see Chapter 6).
Just how much backwater can be tolerated from a bridge depends upon factors such as the
frequency of flooding and the local land use: different values will be adopted for city centres
and open farmland. However, there is another consideration, which is the relationship
between the backwater an d the velocity of flow through the waterway opening. Simple
hydraulics

Fig. 1.8 This 2.06 m span bridge at Polgooth, Cornwall, is reported to have severely obstructed the
stream and thus contributed to severe flooding in the village in November 1997. The bridge
itself exhibits separation of the upstream arch ring; undermining of the foundations was
suspected. It also suffered a partial collapse downstream, and is to be replaced by a
reinforced concrete deck-type bridge. This example serves as a reminder that small bridges
must also be designed with care. (Reproduced by permission of Cornwall County Council)

Page 15

dictates that the larger the head difference across the bridge the greater the waterway velocity.
At sites where scour cannot be tolerated then a backwater of only 0.3m may represent an
upper limit (Bradley, 1978). If the riverbed is s table or consists of rock then a larger value
may be permissible.

1.3.2 Scour effects

Because the openings of a bridge are usually less than the full width of the river, the water
accelerates as it approaches and passes through the waterways. Consequently the velocity is
higher than it would otherwise be, and this can cause scour and undermining of the
foundations of the bridge. The narrower the openings the larger the velocity, and the finer the
material the more easily it can be transported ( Fig. 1.14 and Table 1.3).
Scour can be very destructive. As mentioned earlier it was a problem with old London
Bridge. In 1763 John Smeaton was engaged to stop the bridge being undermined while
alterations were being undertaken (Ruddock, 1979). His favourite solution was to use rock or
rubble bed armouring. He held a low opinion of the comm on alternative of ‘paving’ the bed
between the piers or abutments. Although Smeaton was perhaps the best river engineer of his
time, he too had problems with scour. In 1777 Smeaton designed Hexham Bridge, and while
it was being constructed a flood scoured the gravel from under the upstream ends of all four
piers. Smeaton revised his design to include sheet piling protection and completed the bridge.
Then in March 1782 a combination of rain and snow-melt sent a large flood down the River
Tyne, and this undermined one pier and brought down six arches within 30 minutes. Thus the
man who had successfully built a lighthouse on the notorious Eddy stone Reef 23km (14
miles) off Plymouth had great difficulty in building a bridge across a river! Nor was Smeaton
alone; many engineers before and after have had the same problem. Of course, the materials
and plant available then were very limited by today’s standards, so constructing bridge
foundations in loose sediments where there was deep or fast -flowing water was no easy
matter. Consequently the potential vulnerability of old bridges, many of which survive, should
be remembered. It was mainly the older, smaller bridges that were destroyed in the East
Devon Flood of 1968 described above. Many railway bridges are vulnerable, having been
built during the railway boom of the nineteeenth century. Modern construction techniques
make serious problems with scour less likely, but it should never be forgotten. Indeed, it has a
rude method of reminding us of its existence.
In Oct ober 1988 severe flooding of the River Towy near Llandeilo in Wales caused one of
the piers of Glanrhyd railway bridge to be undermined as a result of scour (Fowler, 1990).
The pier collapsed, and subsequently the whole bridge failed. An early morning pass enger
train drove off the abutment. Four people were killed. In February 1989 scour caused part of
the 127 year old viaduct over the River Ness in Scotland to collapse only half an hour

Page 16

after a train had passed over it (Fig. 1.9). Only a few months earlier the viaduct had passed a
routine maintenance check. It was due for a more comprehensive examination later in the year,
including an underwater inspection (Montague and Fowler, 1989). However, such inspections
are not foolproof. Scour can occur quickly, and scour holes created during a flood can be
refilled as the spate recedes. By the time an inspection can take place the bed may not be
obviously different from that which existed prior to the event, so a fterwards it is easy to
underestimate the depth of scour that has occurred.
In the USA, a failure that caused loss of life was the collapse of the New York State
Thruway Bridge over Schoharie Creek in April 1987; ten persons died. In Tennessee, in April
1989, the route 51 road bridge over the Hatchie River collapsed. This structure fell as a result
of a series of floods in January, February and April, which is thought to have caused scouring
around two of the piers, initiating the failure. Five vehicles drove off the bridge into 10m of
water, killing eight people (Fowler and Russell, 1989; White et al., 1992). The bridge was
1280m long with 143 spans, three of which were the main river spans. The river normally has
a width of 30–50m, but when flowing overbank the floodplain is as wide as the bridge.
Factors that may have contributed to the disaster include the river changing course and/or the
collection of debris on the piers (see Section 1.3.3). It was recognised that because of the fine
riverbed material scour

Fig. 1.9 Part of the viaduct over the River Ness, which collapsed in February 1989. Scour was
suspected to be the cause. (Reproduced by permission of John Paul Photography,
Inverness)

Page 17

could be a problem, and it is reported that the bridge had been inspected from above during
the February floods with no settlement or misalignment being recorded. Paradoxically, the
critical April flood was apparently the smallest of the three.
Scour is a potential problem with all river crossings, but sometimes it may occur where it is
not expected. A change in the thalweg or main river course contributed to both the Glanrhyd
and Hatchie bridge disasters. When there is a shift of course the stream will not hit the piers
head on but from the side, greatly increasing the obstacle to flow and the potential scour depth
(Figs 1.6 and 1.15b). Thus the bridge engineer must assess the likelihood of a change of
course and the possible consequences. Another duty is to ensure that regular and
comprehensive inspections are conducted, both above and below water (Richardson et al.,
1993). Of course, even if it is known that there is a high risk of scour, it is not possible to
undertake an underwater inspection during a flood. Until recently, the only clue to impending
foundation failure might be defects in the superstructure, such as a dip in the parapet. Now
various sensors are available that are capable of monitoring scour as it happens and, if
necessary, of initiating an alarm (Table 8.1 and Fig. 8.3).
The magnitude of the threat posed by scour is illustrated by a study conducted after the
Glanrhyd and Inverness failures. This suggested that over 1000 rail bridges in the UK could
be at serious risk and in need of urgent investigation and foundation work (Watson, 1990).
The true number was subsequently found to be smaller, but this illustrates nicely the scale of
the problem and the degree of uncertainty involved. Virtually every river bridge in the UK has
been under scrutiny, and new guides have been developed (Highways Agency, 1994;
Railtrack, 1995). Bridges in the USA have also been under scrutiny (e.g. Richardson et al.,
1993; Bryan et al., 1995)
So why does a bridge stand for 127 years before failing? Why does a bridge fail during a
flood smaller than experienced only a few months earlier? Luck may determine when a bridge
first encounters an extreme event, the collection of debris is unpredictable, while some effects
(e.g. scour and ageing) can be cumulative. There is also a philosophical answer in the form of
an old saying that no one sets foot in the same river twice. In other words, no two floods are
the same.

1.3.3 Debris

The accumulation of flood debris is one of the more unpredictable problems (Figs 1.10 and
1.11). Anything from leaves to whole trees, and garden sheds (Fig. 6.1) to Dutch barns have
been seen floating downriver during flood. When debris becomes wedged across the
waterway opening or caught on a pier it reduces the flow area and increases the water velocity,
which in turn can increase scour. When combined with the increased

Page 18

Fig. 1.10 Even the performance of a well-designed bridge can be adversely affected by unexpected
flood debris; Ham Footbridge, River Sid, Sidmouth in July 1968. (Reproduced by
permission of Hayes Studio, Sidmouth)

Fig. 1.11 Debris can be a particular problem in forested areas, as illustrated here by Whetcombe
Barton Bridge on the River Teign, Devon, in 1960. The approximate flood level was at the
bottom rail of the parapet. (Reproduced by permission of the Environment Agency)

Page 19

backwater that inevitably occurs, it can also create a horizontal pressure that may lead to
failure of the superstructure (see Appendix A ).
Bridge piers, particularly those in the centre of the main channel, can collect large
quantities of debris, which significantly reduces the hydraulic performance. This should be
taken into consideration at the design stage. Single -span bridges with large central waterways
may be trouble free provided nothing jams across the entire opening. For small single -span
bridges the blockage can be as much as 90% of the opening (Highways Agency, 1994). The
hazard is largest where the catchment above the bridge contains a large forested area with
shallow roots on steep slopes. In the analysis and design of bridge waterways, debris is always
one of the unquantifiable complications. Even if the hydraulic analysis is carried out
diligently, flooding may be much worse than predicted as a result of debris.
The debris does not always have to be caught on the bridge to cause problems: debris that
obstructs the river channel either upstream or downstream of the structure may be sufficient to
change the water levels at the site significantly and thus change the hydraulic performance of
the bridge. Alternatively, the blockage may cause the river to change course.
When analysing the damage that occurred to bridges in Devon and Cornwall between 1964
and 1984 it was apparent that the accumulatio n of debris was either a contributory factor or
suspected of being so in most cases. In September 1989 a fisherman warned police ‘of a
gaping hole’ beneath the main river pier of the Girvan viaduct in Scotland (Pease, 1989).
Nearly one-fifth of the bridge pier had disappeared. One possibility is that debris trapped on
the pier altered the flow of the river, causing the scour. A void 2 m deep by 4 m long was
reported at the upstream end of the pier. The structure was built in the 1880s.

1.4 The hydraulic design of bridges

A good hydraulic analysis is an essential part of designing a successful bridge, as illustrated
by Table 1.1 . Some general guidelines and suggestions are given below, but these are not
exhaustive, and must be modified to suit a particular project: the design of a crossing of
national importance over one of the world’s great rivers is not the same as constructing an
access road to a few isolated properties. Nevertheless, a generalised design process is shown
in Fig. 1.12, which may be a useful reminder of some of the steps involved.
One of the principal features of a successful bridge is an adequately sized opening, which
necessitates the determination of a suitable design flood. Table 1.2 may be of use in selecting
a suitable flood frequency, but the calculation of the flood magnitude is covered in great detail
elsewhere and will not be repeated here (NERC, 1975).

Page 20

Fig. 1.12 Summary of some of the steps involved in the hydraulic design of bridge.

Page 21

1.4.1 Location

Usually the alignment of a highway or railway will be selected so as to minimise the overall
cost, a large part of which may arise from the construction of the river crossings. Therefore it
is sensible to seek an alignment that will minimise the cost of the bridges without significantly
adding to the total length of the road. The optimum location and type of crossing is often the
one that is most economical in terms of both initial construction and long -term maintainance
(a cheap bridge that regularly suffers expensive flood damage is not the best option). It is
normally cheapest and easiest to construct a crossing where the river channel is well defined
and stable, such as where rock outcrops at or near the surface or there are deposits of stiff clay.
In such conditions expensive river training works will probably not be needed (see Chapters 7
and 8). Therefore the alignment of the road and the location of the crossing should be decided
with one eye on the local geology.
Usually it is cheaper to construct an embankment than a bridge or viaduct, so the approach
road embankments should be as long as possible without making the bridge wat erway so
narrow that backwater or scour becomes a significant problem. Of course, if the waterway is
made too narrow any economic advantage is lost because expensive river training works will
be needed to compensate. The same concept, of an optimum opening width, applies to semi-
stable or unstable channels that either migrate slowly or which are capable of a sudden and
permanent change of course during a single flood. If such channels cannot be avoided then the
best available site has to be found. The significant problem of lateral erosion and channel
migration must always be remembered (Figs 1.6 and 1.13).

Stable river channels
Generally a bridge will not span the entire floodplain width, so the best site may be the one
that offers the highest bridge opening ratio (Section 3.2): that is, where the flow in the main
channel is largest compared with that over the floodplains. This helps to optimise the
hydraulic efficiency and minimise the backwater. One of the key design decisions may be
deciding the width of the waterway opening relative to the length of the highway
embankments.

Semi-stable and unstable river channels
If the river channel is gradually moving, frequently shifts co urse or meanders periodically
then site selection is more complex (Fig. 1.13). Assuming that the bridge will not span the
entire floodplain width, some form of river t raining works may be needed to stabilise the
channel and ensure that the flow approaches the bridge as planned, or does not miss the
waterway opening altogether during flood. Training works are usually expensive to

Page 22

Fig. 1.13 Axe Bridge, Colyford, Devon, illustrating the problem of lateral shifting of the channel and
route selection. The meander (bottom centre) looks as though it will be cut off at some time,
possibly within the life of the bridge. When this happens the reduced channel length could
increase velocities and cause degradation (see Fig. 8.8). An old ox -bow can be seen on the
left. (Reproduced by permission of Devon Library Service)

construct and maintain, so the aim should be to minimise such works by using any natural
rock outcrops or other permanent controls, locating the crossing at a node that forms the
crossover point in a sinusoidal meander, or possibly constructing the crossing at a bend if this
is the only relatively stable feature. At a bend the channel may be typically about 1.5–2.0
times the average depth and less likely to shift (Neill, 1973; Farraday and Charlton, 1983).
Sharp bends can be indicative of the presence of relatively resistant local bed material, which
is why the bend is there.
Farraday and Charlton (1983) suggested that with wide floodplains it is generally cheaper
to confine meandering rivers with training works and construct road embankments
approaching the bridge than to bridge the entire inundated width. They quoted examples of
the latter option being 1.12–2.94 times more expensive for floodplains between 1463m and
3658m wide respectively. As described above, theoretically there is an optimum waterway
opening width that will minimise the cost of both

Page 23

the bridge and the river training works. It was also suggested that it may be better to consider
going around very unstable alluvial fans, but if they cannot be avoided then one should at
least try to select an alignment near the inlet.

1.4.2 Examination of existing data

Existing data that are already a vailable or easy to obtain should be examined before
embarking on an expensive field investigation. Some typical data and sources were given by
Richardson et al. (1990) and the Highways Agency (1994) for the USA and UK respectively.
The sort of data requir ed are as follows.

TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS
To determine channel and floodplain width, to help identify possible crossing sites, to obtain
the channel gradient, and to indicate floodplain use. Forested areas upstream may suggest
debris problems. Old editions of the maps may assist in identifying changes in channel
alignment and land use, and hence problems with channel shifting and long-term degradation
or aggradation (see Section 8.2.2). The land use may help decide the maximum permissible
backwater.

AIRPHOTOS AND SATELLITE PHOTOS
Largely as for topographic maps.

CHARTS AND TIDE TABLES
For navigable waters charts may be available showing widths and depths, while tide tables
will help determine the range of depths in estuaries. Any information regarding wave heights
should also be obtained.

GEOLOGICAL MAPS, SOIL MAPS AND GEOLOGICAL MEMOIRS
May provide some details about the local geology and the likelihood of the channel migrating
or of scour being a problem.

CONSTRUCTION DETAILS OF EXISTING BRIDGES
May yield some data regarding the geology, depth of foundations required, the design flood
and the waterway dimensions. Have these bridges been successful? Are all of their spans
used? Are the bridges bypassed during flood? Are their decks high enough? Has serious scour
occurred? Have river training works been added subsequently? Is there another bridge or
structure

Page 24

(see Section 4.3.4) that will interfere hydraulically with the proposed crossing or vice versa?

HYDROLOGICAL DATA
Such as gauging station records, annual maxima, stage—discharge relationship, and flow—
duration curve. These are needed to help identify the design flood and the maximum likely
water level, and to plan construction work.

METEOROLOGICAL DATA
Rainfall depths and intensities, snowfall and snow-melt, temperatur e range and wind speed.
These data may help in assessing the possibility of flash flood, and of ice formation and ice
loading on the superstructure. If appropriate, the wind speed can be used to assess potential
wave heights. Both ice and waves may have to be allowed for when determining the height of
the deck.

RIVER CHANNEL DATA
Things such as the roughness of the channel and floodplains (say for use in the Manning
equation) are never easy to determine at the best of times and may have to be inferred initially
from photographs or from preliminary visits to the site.
In hydraulic calculations it is really the slope of the water surface or energy line over a
distance of around 10–20 channel widths that is required, not the physical slope of the bed.
However, this can often be obtained only from observations of floods, not from maps.
Similarly it may be difficult to determine the width and depth of the river channel from maps.
There are equations and diagrams that can be used to obtain typical dimensions (see Section
8.6) but it is much better to base even preliminary calculations on real observations.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Such as river regulation, ice flows, logging , or navigation that will require additional
clearance between the flood level and the bridge superstructure. Environmental considerations
are rightly becoming increasingly important and may determine whether or not river training
works, spur dykes (see Section 7.4) or bypass channels can be constructed, and may also
influence the appearance and design of the bridge and its highway embankments. Any
environmental restraints should be fully explored at the outset, particularly in sensitive areas.

Page 25

1.4.3 Field investigations

These are typically used to confirm the accuracy of the data above and to provide missing
information: for example, the location of rock outcrops and hydraulic control points within
the river, such as rapids. Samples of bed and bank material can be obtained for analysis to
determine composition, grading and D50 value, and to assess scour and erosion potential
(Table 1.3 ). In this respect it is worth looking for evidence of scour, especially at bends where
the maximum flow velocity may be around 1.5 times the mean velocity of the river (in a
straight channel the maximum is around 1.25 times the mean). If appropriate and possible,
measure the actual velocity at the bends and relate this to the depth of the bed; this may give a
guide as to what will

Table 1.3 (a) Approximate erosion threshold velocities, VE. If water velocities exceed VE then erosion
is predicted

Bank material

Clay
Silt
Fine sand
Medium sand
Coarse sand
Sandy loam
Loam
Gravel
Pebbles/stones

After Netlon Ltd

Approximate diameter, D (mm)

VE (m/s)

< 0.002
0.002–0.06
0.06–0.2
0.2–0.6
0.6–2

2–60
>60

> 1.2
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.9
1.0
3.0

(b) Tentative guide to competent mean velocities for the erosion of cohesive materials. The
competent mean velocity (Vsc) is the velocity at which the flow is just competent to move the
exposed bed material
Depth of flow Low values: easily erodible
material
(m/s)

Average values High values: resistant
material
(m/s)

(m)

(m/s)

1.5
3
6
15

0.6
0.65
0.7
0.8

1.0
1.2
1.3
1.5

1.8
2.0
2.3
2.6

After Neill, 1973; reproduced with permission, University of Toronto Press
Notes:
1. This table is to be regarded as a rough guide only, in the absence of data based on local experience. Account
must be taken of the expected condition of the material after exposure to weathering and saturation.
2. It is not considered advisable to rela te the suggested low, average and high values to soil shear strength or
other conventional indices because of the predominating effects of weathering and saturation on the erodibility
of many cohesive soils.

Page 26

happen in the opening. The same argument applies to the noses of groynes and spur dykes,
where the maximum velocity may be around 2.0 times the average.
Evidence of flood levels may be apparent from trash deposits, ice scars or stains on existing
structures. If the available hydrological data are limited, interviews with local residents can
often provide rudimentary information regarding the frequency and height of floods. The
opportunity should also be used to visualise flood flows both before and after the construction
of the proposed crossing (Figs 8.8 and 8.16). How will the flow pattern be affected? Is bypass
flow around the bridge possible? Should relief openings be provided on the floodplain(s), or
would they be an unnecessary expense? Are flood flows spread evenly across the full width of
the floodplain? Or are parts of t he floodplain used for flood storage with zero conveyance?
This will affect the calculation of the bridge opening ratio and the estimation of the backwater.
In the bridge approach, is the direction of flow on the floodplain the same as in the main
channel, or different? What is the optimum orientation for the piers and abutments?

1.4.4 General hydraulic design philosophy

In addition to deciding the relative length of the bridge opening and any highway
embankments, the designer will often have some idea as to whether the bridge will be a single
or multispan structure from the channel and floodplain width and a knowledge of the
economic importance of the crossing. What may be less obvious is whether or not a
‘conventional’ design with the approach embankment s above the highest expected flood level
(so traffic is not disrupted) is better than the alternative of keeping the approaches low so that
anything larger than the design flood spills over them with relatively little damage (Chapter 6).
It is highly unlikely that one of the minimum-energy waterways described in Section 7.5
would be adopted, but at problem sites with certain characteristics this may be an option.

1.4.5 Preliminary design of the bridge waterway

From the above it should be possible to identify one preferred location for the waterway. The
design procedure can be shortened if it is already known what the pier arrangement will be,
otherwise an educated guess is needed. Pier spacing depends upon economics, ground
conditions, navigation requirements, backwater restrictions, potential scour, and aesthetics. Of
course, from the hydraulic perspective a single-span opening is preferable, but if piers are
unavoidable then use as few as possible. Spillthrough abutments are better than vertical -wall
types and will help to reduce afflux and scour (see Chapters 4 and 8).
As a starting point it can be assumed that the width of the opening (b) is either equal to the
width between the river banks (B) or is between the

values obtained from the two equations below, according to the importance of the crossing.

Page 27

Page 28

Fig 1.14 Variation of competent mean velocity (VSC) with the median diameter by weight (D50) and
depth of flow. The competent mean velocity is that at which the flow is just competent to
move the exposed bed material at the scoured depth. (After Neill, 1973. Reproduced by
permission of University of Toronto Press)

the original dimensions may require modification, which affects the afflux. However, at some
point an acceptable waterway should be obtained. The process is quicker if any bridge piers
have been included, otherwise they may have to be added during the next stage and some of
the calculations repeated.
Once the size of the bridge openings is known, the design should be reviewed. Have all of
the factors listed earlier been considered? Has the correct balance been obtained between the
length of the approach embankments and the span of the bridge? Has the correct balance been
struck between minimising the waterway cost and the use of river training works to offset any
undesirable consequences? Consult the checklist in Section 8.5.2. If the design passes this
rev iew then the next stage, the preliminary design of the structure itself, can be started. If not,
some redesign is necessary.
Subsequently additional data and calculation will be needed to complete the hydraulic
design: for example, some techniques for calculating back-water have their own specific
requirements, which may necessitate additional

Fig. 1.15 (a) Approximate pier scour depth, dSP , for various pier shapes aligned to the approach flow,
where bp is the pier width perpendicular to the flow. If the depth of flow exceeds 5bp then
dSP should be increased by 50%. (b) If the approach flow is at an angle to the pier then
multiply dSP from part (a) by the factor shown in the table. (After Neill, 1973. Reproduced
by permission of University of Toronto Press)

Page 29

b Multiplying factors for local scour at skewed piers* (to be applied to local scour
allowances of part a).
Angle of attack

Length-to -width ratio of pier in plan
4
8
12

0°
15°
30°
45°

1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5

1.0
2.0
2.5
3.5

1.0
2.5
3.5
4.5

*The table is intended to indicate the approximate range only. Design depths for severely skewed piers, where
the use of these is unavoidable, should preferably be determined by means of special model tests. The values
quoted are based approximately on graphs by Laursen (1962).

Page 30

survey work and computation. Similarly, more detailed information may be needed to assess
contraction and local scour (i.e. at piers and abutments), plus any long -term changes in bed
elevation, as described in Sections 3.11 and 8.2.2.

1.4.6 Preliminary structural design of the bridge

This includes deciding the level of the deck and the foundation details, which may be related
to the maximum scour depth (see Section 8.5.3 and Table 8.9 ). If the bridge deck will be
submerged during flood, buoyancy and hydrodynamic forces must be allowed for when
designing the superstructure (Appendix A), and the afflux calculated accordingly. The
possibility of additional loading due to debris and ice jams should be assessed. In some
circumstances ship collision should be included.
Submergence of the opening may cause a very large vertical contraction from the soffit of
the deck so that the cross -sectional area of flow is considerably reduced and waterway
velocities significantly increased (Sections 2.4 and 7.2). The feasibility of using entrance
rounding to improve flow efficiency and reduce scour should be considered ( Fig. 1.1).
Having established the basic structural form of the bridge, ensure that any river training
works considered necessary during the hydraulic design are still appropriate and effective. If
the structural requirements are such that the integrity of the hydraulic design has been
compromised, then it is necessary to loop back to an earlier stage (Fig. 1.12). If everything is
satisfactory, a costing of the bridge, approaches and training works can be obtained.

1.4.7 Consider alternatives

Having found one acceptable design, the opportunity should be taken to revisit the original
data and to evaluate whether or not an alternative location or different design approach would
yield a cheaper and/or more effective alternative. If the existing design proves to be superior,
the design can be finalised. Alternatively, with complex sites or prestigious projects it may be
decided to undertake physical or computer modelling to confirm the detailed and long -term
flow behaviour before committing to the final design stage.

Example 1.1

A preliminary hydraulic design is required for a bridge to cross a 60m wide main channel
with floodplains 150m wide on each side when the discharge is 490m 3/s. The corresponding
flow depth is 2.6m in the main channel and, since the river has banks 1.0m high, 1.6m on the
immediately adjoining floodplain. The diameter of the sand bed material is D50=1.0 mm.

Lacey (maximum waterway) width=4.75Q½=4.75×490 =105m

approximate minimum waterway width=3.20Q½=3.20×490½ =71m

Page 31

(1.5)

(1.6)

Try an opening 80m wide between abutments with three piers each 1.2m wide at 20 m
centres. This gives a net opening width b=76.4 m, which allows for some contraction of the
flow. If the depth (Y) is approximately 2.6 m and b=76.4 m then the net cross-sect ional area of
flow in the opening, a=2.6×76.4=199m2. Thus the opening velocity V=490/199 =2.5 m/s.
Now consider the potential contraction scour depth, dSC.
As a first iteration, with D50=1 mm and Y=2.6m from Fig. 1.14 the competent mean
velocity (VSC) is about 1.0 m/s, suggesting that the opening area will increase until V=VSC
when a=Q/V SC=490/1.0=490m 2
and the average depth of flow Y=a/b=490/76.4=6.4 m. With
Y=6.4 m the competent mean velocity increases to about 1.6 m/s.
Second iteration: say V=1.35 m/s when a=490/1.35=363 m 2 giving Y=363/76.4=4.8 m.
With D50=1 mm both VSC=1.35 m/s and Y=4.8 m are broadly consistent with Fig. 1.14 so
assume the average contraction scour depth in the opening is about dSC=(4.8−2.6)=2.2 m. At
the piers the scour depth will be larger as a result of the locally increased velocity and
vortices. Say the piers have a width bP=1.2 m, have round noses, and are aligned to the
approach flow (therefore no correction for the angle of attack is needed). From Fig. 1.15 the
local pier scour depth dsp=1.5 bP= 1.5×1.2=1.8 m. Adding this to the contraction scour depth
gives a combined depth dS=4.0 m.
These very approximate scour depths can be compared with the results of the more detailed
calculations shown in Example 8.5 and Fig. 8.24.

References

Ackers, P. (1992) Gerald Lacey Memorial Lecture, Canal and river regime in theory and practice:
1929–92. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Water Maritime and Energy, 96,
September, 167–178.
d’Aubuisson de Voisins, J.F. (1840) Traité de hydraulique (Treatise on Hydraulics), 2nd edn, Piois,
Levraut et Cie, Paris.
Blench, T. (1939) A new theory of turbulent flow of liquids of small viscosity. Journal of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Paper 5185.
Bradley, J.N. (1978) Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways, 2nd edn, US Department of
Transportation/Federal Highways Administration, Washington DC.
Brandon, T.W. (ed.) (1987) Water Practice Manuals, 8, River Engineering—Part I, Design Principles,
The Institution of Water and Environmental Managemen t, London.
Brandon, T.W. (ed.) (1989). Water Practice Manuals, 8, River Engineering—Part II, Structures and
Coastal Defence Works, The Institution of Water and Environmental Management, London.

Page 32

Brice, J.C. (1984) Assessment of channel stability at bridge sites, in Transportation Research Record
950 , Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National
Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 163 –171 .
Bryan, B.A., Simon, A., Outlaw, G.S. and Thomas, R. (1995) Methods for assessing the channel
conditions related to scour -critical conditions at bridges in Tennessee. Final report project no. TN -
RES1012, United States Geological Survey, Nashville.
Criswell , H. (1968) East Devon Floods 10th-11th July, 1968. Report to Roads Committee, Devon
County Council, Exeter.
Farraday, R.V. and Charlton, F.G. (1983) Hydraulic Factors in Bridge Design, Hydraulics Research
Station, Wallingford, England.
Fowler, D. (1990) Glanrhyd report says BR had no warning. New Civil Engineer, 3 May, 5.
Fowler, D. and Russell, L. (1989) Seven die as scour undermines US bridge. New Civil Engineer, 6
April, 7 –8.
George, A.B. (1982) Devon floods and the waterways of bridges. Proceedings of the Institution of
Civil Engineers, Part 2, 73, 125–134; discussion, 73, 687–692.
Hamill, L. and O’Leary, A.M. (1985) The hydraulic performance and failure of bridges in Devon and
Cornwall . Municipal Engineer, 2, August, 213–221.
Highways Agency (1994) Design Manual for Roads Bridges, Vol. 1, Section 3, Part 6, BA59/94, The
Design of Highway Bridges for Hydraulic Action, HMSO, London.
HMSO (1975) The Reservoirs Act, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.
Holford, I. (1977) The Guinness Book of Weather Facts and Feats, Guinness Superlatives, Enfield,
Middlesex.
Inglis, C. (1949) The behaviour and control of rivers and canals. Research Publication
No. 13, Central Water Power Irrigation and Navigation Report, Poona Research Station, Indi a.
Kennedy, R.G. (1895) The prevention of silting in irrigation canals. Proceedings of the Institution of
Civil Engineers, 119, 281–290.
Lacey, G. (1929–30) Stable channels in alluvium. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,
229 , 258–384.
Lacey, G. (1933–34) Uniform flow in alluvial rivers and canals. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, 237 , 421–453.
Lacey, G. (1939) Regime flow in incoherent alluvium. Publication 20, Central Board of Irrigation and
Power , India.
Lane, E.W. (1921) Experiments on the flow of water through contractions in an open channel.
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 83, 1149–1219.
Laursen, E.M. (1962) Scour at bridge crossings. Transactions of the American Society of Civil
Engineer s, 127 , part 1, 166–180.
Montague, S. and Fowler, D. (1989) Rains wash away Inverness rail bridge. New Civil Engineer, 9
February, 5.
Nagler, F.A. (1918) Obstruction of bridge piers to the flow of water. Transactions of the American
Society of Civil Engineers, 82, 334 –395.
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) (1975) Flood Studies Report. Vol I: Hydrological
Studies. Vol II: Meteorological Studies. Vol III: Flood Routing Studies. Vol IV: Hydrological Data.
Vol V: Maps. NERC, London.

Page 33

Neill, C.R. (ed.) (1973) Guide to Bridge Hydraulics, Roads and Transportation Association of
Canada/University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Netlon Ltd. Maritime and Waterway Engineering with Tensar and Netlon Geogrids, Blackburn,
England.
Novak, P., Moffat, A.I.B., Nalluri, C. and Narayanan, R. (1996) Hydraulic Structures, 2nd edn, Unwin
Hyman, London.
Overman, M. (1975) Man, The Bridge Builder, Priory Press, Hove, England.
Pease, J. (1989) BR fails to notice rail bridge scour. New Civil Engineer, 21 September, 7.
Railtrack (1995) Scour and flooding—managing the risk. Railway group standard, GC/RT 5143,
Railtrack, London.
Richardson, E.V., Simons, D.B. and Julien, P.Y. (1990) Highways in the river environment. Report no.
FHWA -HI-90–016, National Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Richardson, E.V., Harrison, L.J., Richardson J.R. and Davis S.R. (1993) Evaluating Scour at Bridges,
2nd edn. Publication no. FHWA -IP-90–017, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 18, National
Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Ruddock, E. (1979) Arch Bridges and Their Builders 1735–1835, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Smith, D.W. (1976) Bridge failures. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Part 1, 60,
August, 367–382.
Smith, D.W. (1977) Why do bridges fail? Civil Engineering, American Society of Civil Engineers,
November, 58–62.
Watson, R. (1990) Hundreds of bridges to undergo scour tests. New Civil Engineer, 9 August, 5.
White, K.R., Minor, J. and Derucher, K.N. (1992) Bridge Maintenance, Inspection and Evaluation,
2nd edn, Marcel Dekker Inc., New York.
Yarnell, D.L. (1934) Bridge piers as channel obstructions. Technical Bulletin no. 442, November, US
Dept. of Agriculture , Washington DC.

