Page 103

4
How to calculate discharge and afflux

4.1 Introduction

Usually bridge hydraulics is concerned with determining either the stage-discharge
relationship of a structure or the afflux, or possibly both. This chapter shows how to analyse
the flow through rectangular and arched bridge waterway openings with either single or
multispans, before and af ter the waterway becomes drowned. The abutments provide the
primary contraction, with the piers being a secondary influence: often the gross area of the
waterway opening (A N2, which includes the area occupied by any piers) is employed initially
in the calc ulations, and then a correction factor (J) is introduced to allow for the secondary
obstruction of the piers. Typically J =A P/A N2 where AP is the cross-sectional area of the
submerged parts of the piers projected onto section 1. On the other hand, Chapter 5 considers
long crossings where it is the piers that control the flow while the effect of the abutments is
negligible.
The methods described below are relatively simple, most being devised before the
computer era. Thus they provide a method of analysis for engineers without access to today’s
specialist computer software and, for those who do, a means of quickly checking the results.
Since there have been relatively f ew major investigations of bridge hydraulics, some of the
principles and equations described in Chapters 4–6 will be included in the software.
Four methods of analysis are considered below; each is introduced, described in more detail,
and then its advantages and disadvantages summarised. Only a condensed version of the
original publications can be reproduced, so whenever possible readers should refer to the
source material. These methods are attributable to:
• US Geological Survey (USGS);
• US Bureau of Public Roads (USBPR);
• Biery and Delleur;
• Hydraulics Research (HR).
The first two listed were developed almost entirely for rectangular openings and ‘deck type’
bridges, while the last two were mainly con cerned with arch

Page 104

bridges. However, all four methods can sometimes be applied to arches, as shown in Section
4.6 (Matthai, 1967; Hamill, 1993). Which method is adopted depends to some extent upon the
data available, the ease of application, the type of flow experienced (e.g. subcritical,
supercritical, abnormal stage), the waterway geometry (e.g. rectangular, arched, single or
multispan), and the purpose of the investigation. The USGS and the USBPR methods are the
most frequently employed. Both have some restrictions on their use (Sections 4.2.3 and 4.3.7),
which should be understood before undertaking an analysis. With any of the methods large
errors may be incurred under adverse conditions or when conditions differ significantly from
those of the original research (Skogerboe et al., 1973; Barret and Skogerboe, 1973; Fiuzat and
Skogerboe, 1983; Kaatz and James, 1997). Adverse conditions include the following.
• Sites where the flow is non -uniform and abnormal stages exist. Paradoxically, Barret and
Skogerboe (1973) found that the USBPR method was more accurate with an abnormal
stage, but conjectured that a greater range of data would reveal greater errors. However, it
is certainly true that an abnormal profile complicates the calculations, which are much
simpler when uniform flow exists and normal depth provides a convenient datum (Figs. 2.3
and 2.4). Generally, with an abnormal stage the bridge exerts a relatively weak control on
the flow, reducing the accuracy of an analysis.
• Crossings where the opening ratio is large (e.g. M=0.8) so that the bridge does not exert a
strong control on the flow. Under these conditions Fiuzat and Skogerboe (1983) claimed
that the USGS method may underestimate the discharge (see Section 4.2.3, items 2 and 3).
• Sites with wide, heavily vegetated floodplains. With wide valleys the flow approaching a
bridge has to move from the floodplain into the main channel in order to pass through the
constriction. Laursen (1970) termed this a zone of accretion. Similarly, having passed
through the opening, the flow expands from the main channel back onto the floodplain.
This was termed a zone of abstraction. For flow to expand laterally in the zone of
abstraction it follows that the wate r surface must slope away from the main channel (this is
the reverse of the normal situation). If the floodplain is heavily covered with trees and
brush, a large transverse gradient is required to overcome the resistance to lateral flow, so
backwater can occur downstream of a bridge as well as upstream. Consequently Laursen
concluded that in wide valleys the upstream backwater can be much greater than that
predicted by either the USGS or USBPR method, so it is not surprising that under these
conditions the backwater measured by Kaatz and James (1997) was roughly double that
expected (computer models also had significant errors; see Section 4.6). Laursen presented
a numerical approach to this problem, but a drawback was that the accretion and abstraction
rates had to be assumed.

Page 105

• Locations where two or more bridges affect each other hydraulically (Figs 4.27 and 4.28).
The comments above regarding inaccuracies arising from the application of the USGS and
USBPR techniques do not mean that they should not be used, rather that these are the most
commonly employed methods and thus the most critically appraised. The others are used less
so there is little or no evidence available from third parties regarding their accuracy. Care
needs to be exercised when interpreting articles discussing the (lack of) accuracy of the
various methods: sometimes ‘errors’ arise because the equations are used outside their
recommended range or under conditions not included in the original study. As always, it is
difficult to obtain accurate field data with which to form an assessment. Generally, models
verified using a large body of accurate field data should be the most reliable.

4.2 US Geological Survey (USGS) method

This was one of the largest and most comp rehensive investigations of flow through
rectangular openings (Kindsvater et al., 1953; Tracy and Carter, 1954; Matthai, 1967). It is
based on an extensive laboratory study, which was verified at 30 field sites. It included four
different types of opening, eccentricity, skew, entrance rounding, piers, wingwalls and
submergence of the opening (but not abnormal stage or supercritical flow). The procedure has
been well documented in hydraulics textbooks (Chow, 1981; French, 1986) and is widely
used, so it may be the method most familiar to some engineers and hydrologists. The original
work was extended by Matthai (1967), who suggested that the Type I opening with vertical
abutments and vertical embankments often approximates an arched waterway, but if much of
t he arch is submerged a reliable answer cannot be obtained. Nevertheless, there is some
justification for cautiously applying the technique to arch bridges.
Essentially the bridge was regarded as a form of gauging device, and a procedure was
devised for ca lculating the peak discharge at the contraction from the observed water levels at
sections 1 and 3 (in practice this often means using trash marks). The theoretical basis is the
energy and continuity equations, which are combined to give a discharge equation (equation
4.5) that can be applied to openings operating in either the channel flow or submerged
condition. A method of calculating the afflux was added, but this is not exactly
straightforward.
This method needs the water levels at sections 1 and 3. S ection 1 is generally located one
span (b) upstream. Section 3 is located at the minimum cross -sectional area of flow on a line
parallel to the bridge face, generally between the abutments and not necessarily at the
downstream face of the opening. Unfortunately during a flood it is not always easy to observe
or measure accurately the stage at section 3 since it may be located inside a

Page 106

waterway opening that is flowing almost full. Nor is this stage easy to calculate. There are
ways to get around this, which are described in Section 4.2.2, but they tend to be relatively
convoluted and tedious. Another difficulty associated with the technique is that it uses the
Froude number at section 3, which, as explained in Section 3.3, becomes meaningless as an
arched opening closes and the waterway becomes submerged.

4.2.1 Calculation of discharge (stage -discharge analysis)

The USGS method assumes that the contracted section formed by the bridge abutments and
the channel bed is effectively a discharge meter that can be utilised to calculate flood flows.
This is achieved by substituting into the discharge equation the values of a series of
experimental coefficients that relate to standard types of opening (see below) and the
measured difference in water level between sections 1 and 3.
The discharge equation is derived from the continuity and energy equations. For
convenience it has been assumed that the bed is horizontal in Fig. 4.1, and that the vena
contracta occurs at section 3. Thus the energy equation can be written as

(4.1)

where hE is the head loss (m) due to eddying and turbulence between sections 1 and 3, and hF
represents the head loss (m) due to boundary friction between sections 1 and 3. If (Y1−Y3)=∆h,
then

(4.2)

Fig. 4.1 Diagrammatic representation of flow through a bridge opening for the derivation of the USGS
discharge equation.

Now from the continuity equation:

Q=CC b Y 3 V3

Page 107

(4.3)

(4.4)

For a rectangular opening A3=bY3 and for an arched waterway A3 can be taken as the cross -
sectional area of the waterway at depth Y3 so:

(4.5)

where C is a dimensionless coefficient of discharge that is a function of CC , a3 and hE; Q is the
discharge (m3 /s); A3 (m 2) is the gross cross-sectional area of flow (including the area occupied
by any piers) at section 3 at the minimum contracted section measured parallel to the bridge
face; ∆h is the difference in elevation (m) of the water surface between sections 1 and 3; and

Assuming that in the opening K2=K3 and that K1−2=K1−3=(K1K3)1/2, then

Page 108

Page 109

where all the terms are in metric units. If working in feet the 4.43 should be replaced by the
value of (2g)1/2 , which is 8.02. This equation has the advantage that it can be solved directly
for Q without having to iterate. However, if C is a function of the Froude number, as with
type I openings, then an iterative solution is still required.

The standard opening types
There are four types of opening (Kindsvater et al., 1953; Matthai, 1967). When slopes are
quoted below they are in the form 1 vertical to x horizontal.

TYPE I
Vertical embankments and vertical abutments, with or without wingwalls (Fig. 4.2). In
addition to the opening ratio (M) and length ratio (L/b), the Froude number, the degree of
entrance rounding or the wingwall angle, and the skew of the contraction with respect to the
direction of flow affect the coefficient of discharge (Fig. 4.3). Matthai suggested that this type
of open ing often approximates an arched waterway, but if much of the arch is submerged a
reliable answer cannot be obtained.

TYPE II
Sloping embankments and vertical abutments (Fig. 4.4). In addition to the opening ratio (M)
and length ratio (L/b), the depth of water at the abutments, the skew angle and the
embankment slope affect the coefficient of discharge. Charts are presented for embankment
slopes of 1 to 1 and 1 to 2 (Figs 4.5 and 4.6).

TYPE III
Sloping embankments and sloping spillthrough abutments (Fig. 4.7). In addition to the
opening ratio (M) and the length ratio (L/b), the skew angle and the slope of the embankment
and abutments affect the coefficient of discharge. The effect of the slope of the type III
abutments is represented by x/b, where x is the horizontal thickness of the upstream side slope
measured longitudinally at the projected level of the water surface at section 1, and b is the
average width of the opening. Note that with all sloping embankments x is included in the
waterway length, L . Three embankment slopes were investigated: 1 to 1, 1 to 1.5, and 1 to 2,
each of which must be evaluated using its own charts (Figs 4.8–4.10).

TYPE IV
Sloping embankments, vertical abutments with wingwalls (Fig. 4.11). In addition to the
opening ratio (M) and length ratio (L/b), the wingwall

Page 110

Fig. 4.2 Diagram defining a USGS type I opening with vertical embankments and vertical abutments,
with or without wingwalls. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US
Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 111

Fig. 4.3 USGS coefficients for type I openings with vertical embankments and vertical abutments.
Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C' , which is then multiplied by the
adjustment factors in diagrams (b)–(g) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation with (b)
Froude number; (c) entrance rounding. (After Matthai, 1967). Reproduced by permission of
US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 112

Fig. 4.3 USGS coefficients for type I openings with vertical embankments and vertical abutments
(cont.). Diagram (d) length of 45° wingwalls or chamfers; (e) length of 30° wingwalls; (f)
length of 60° wingwalls; (g) skew, ø. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of
US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

angle, skew, embankment slope, and sometimes the Froude number affect the coefficient of
discharge. Charts are presented for embankment slopes of 1 to 1 and 1 to 2 (Figs 4.12 and
4.13). Note that the existence of wingwalls does not automatically make a type IV opening,
since a type I may also have wingwalls. If the flow passes around a vertical edge at the
upstream extremity of the wingwall it is a type I opening, but if the flow passes around a
sloping edge it is a type IV .

The coefficient of discharge, C, and the adjustment factors
For any opening type the value of the coefficient of discharge, C, is obtained by means of a
‘standard’ base coefficient, C', and a series of numerical adjustment factors, k. First, the type
of opening is identified (e.g. type I). Next, M and L/b are calculated and used to obtain C'
from the appropriate chart (e.g. Fig. 4.3a ). This value assumes the standard

Page 113

Fig. 4.4 Diagram defining a USGS type II opening with sloping embankments and vertical abutments.
(After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the
Interior)

Page 114

Fig. 4.5 USGS coefficients for type II openings with an embankment slope of 1 to 1 and vertical
abutments. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C ', which is then multiplied
by the adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation
with (b) (Y a+Yb)/2 b ratio; (c) skew. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US
Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 115

Fig. 4.6 USGS coefficients for type II openings with an embankment slope of 1 to 2 and vertical
abutments. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C ', which is then multiplied
by the adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation
with (b) (Y a+Yb)/2 b ratio; (c) skew. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US
Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 116

Fig. 4.7 Diagram defining a USGS type III opening with sloping embankments and sloping abutments.
(After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the
Interior)

Page 117

Fig. 4.8 USGS coefficients for type III openings with both embankment and abutment slopes of 1 to 1.
Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C' , which is then multiplied by the
adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation with
(b) skew; (c) x/b ratio. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological
Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 118

Fig. 4.9 USGS coefficients for type III openings with both embankment and abutment slopes of 1 to
1.5. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C' , which is then mult iplied by the
adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation with
(b) skew; (c) x/b ratio. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological
Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 119

Fig. 4.10 USGS coefficients for type III openings with both embankment and abutment slopes of 1 to
2. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C', which is then multiplied by the
adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment factor variation with
(b) skew; (c) x/b ratio. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological
Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 120

Fig. 4.11 Diagram defining a USGS type IV opening with sloping embankments and vertical
abutments with wingwalls. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US
Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

conditions of no entrance rounding (r/b=0), no chamfer (w/b=0), F=0.5, no eccentricity
(e=1.0), no skew (ø=0), no obstruction caused by piers (J= 0), and no submergence (k T=1.0).
Then the values of the adjustment factors are obtained from the relevant chart and used to
modify C' to allow for

Page 121

Fig. 4.12 USGS coefficients for type IV openings with an embankment slope of 1 to 1 and vertical
abutments with wingwalls. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of discharge, C' , which is
then multiplied by the adjustment factors in diagrams (b) and (c) as appropriate: adjustment
factor variation with (b) skew; (c) wingwall angle. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by
permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 122

Fig. 4.13 USGS coefficients for type IV openings with an embankment slope of 1 to 2 and vertical
abutments with wingwalls. Diagram (a) gives the base coefficient of d ischarge, C' , which is
then multiplied by the adjustment factors in diagrams (b)– (d) as appropriate: adjustment
factor variation with (b) skew; (c) Froude number; (d) wingwall angle. (After Matthai,
1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

the deviation from the standard conditions. Thus the coefficient of discharge, C, which takes
into account all of the pertinent variables for the opening type, is given by:

Page 123

(4.10)

Of course, not all of the adjustment factors are required and only the relevant ones are used.
For instance, the effect of eccentricity is usually small (Table 4.1) so ke is often omitted, while
only one of k r , kw and kθwould be needed to describe the geometry of the waterway. The use
of k p and kT is described later when piers and submerged openings are considered. Note that
the Froude number used is that relating to the contracted section so F3 =V 3/(gY3)½ where
Y3=A3/ bT is the mean depth at section 3. As explained in Section 3.3, this causes problems
with arches.
Under no circumstances should a value of C greater than 1.0 ever be adopted. Additionally,
some adjustment factors are insignificant with cer tain types of waterway, so only the
diagrams associated with a particular type of opening should be used. For embankments of
different slope from those shown in the diagrams it is necessary to interpolate, although with
type IV openings the coefficients fo r a 1 in 2 slope can also be used for flatter slopes (i.e. 1 in
3, 1 in 4 etc). If the abutment slope is not equal to the embankment slope, an average value
should be used.
If the two abutments are of different type, a value of C should be calculated for each side
and a weighted average obtained using the conveyance (K) of the two sides. Using subscripts
L and R to denote the left and right sides:

Page 124

Figure 4.14a illustrates how the USGS method treats skew. Unusually the projected width
of the opening at section 1 is b, while the distance between the abutments measured along the
centreline of the embankment is also b. Thus b=bS ; this is not the case in Fig. 3.7 nor in the
USBPR method.

Eccentricity, ke
Originally Kindsvater et al. (1953) used the ratio of the length of the two abutments to define
eccentricity and the adjustment factor (Fig. 3.1e). Matthai (1967) changed this to the ratio of
the conveyances of the floodplains or approach sections (Ka and Kc in Fig. 4.14b) on each
side of the projected opening width (b) thus:

Page 125

Fig 4.14 Diagram comparing (a) a skewed crossing with (b) a normal crossing on a bend. In (a) the
longitudinal centreline of the highway embankments is not perpendicular to either the
approaching flow or the river banks indicating skew. In (b) the highway embankments are
perpendicular to the approaching flow and the river banks. Note that with the USGS
method the full skewed length of the opening, b, is superimposed on the main river channel
at section 1, as indicated, with Ka, Kb and Kc being the conveyances of the three channel
subsections. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US
Dept of the Interior)

Page 126

perpendicular to the approach flow or the high-water line (Fig. 4.14a), but with a curved
approach this is the case (Fig. 4.14b). For a bend where sections 1, 2 and 3 are not parallel,
the distance between sections 1 and 2 should be measured from the centroid of section 1 to the
centre of section 2. Note that when projecting the bridge opening upstream to section 1 this
method uses the full width b, which is centred on the main river channel at section 1.

Piers or piles and multiple openings
The procedure for a bridge with piers or piles is as before, with the exception that another
adjustment factor is needed to deal with this new condition. The proportion of the waterway
blocked by the piles is

where AP is the submerged area of the piers or piles projected onto the plane of section 3,
which is the minimum contracted section parallel to the line of the bridge face and approach
embankments, and A 3 is the gross area of section 3. The adjustment factor, kp , is found from
Fig. 4.15. Diagram a relates to piers, and its use is quite straightforward. Diagram b is
employed for piles: for example, suppose M=0.59, L/b=0.69 and J=0.04. The pro

(4.13)

Fig. 4.15 USGS adjustment factors for (a) piers and (b) piles. With (b), the dashed lines illustrate the
procedure for M=0.59, L/b=0.69 and J=0.04. Start with the value of M (i.e. 0.59) in the
right-hand diagram, move vertically up to the L/b value (0.69), continue across horizontally
into the left diagram to the 0.10 diagonal reference line, move up to the J=0.04 line and
then horizontally across to obtain kp=0.965. (After Matthai, 1967. R eproduced by
permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 127

cedure is to enter the right-hand diagram at the appropriate M (=0.59 as indicated by the
dashed line), move vertically up to the L/b value (0.69), move horizontally to the diagonal line
marked J=0.10 on the diagram on the left, move vertically up to the J=0.04 line, move
horizontally across to the left-hand axis and read off the value of kp , which is 0.965 in this
particular example. Note that the diagonal J=0.10 line is the reference line from which to
move either vertically up or down depending upon whether J <0.10 or J>0.10. The original
diagrams presented by Matthai (1967) have the J values above the diagonal 0.10 line shown
as 0.8, 0.6, 0.4 and 0.2 when presumably these should be 0.08, 0.06, 0.04 and 0.02.
If a bridge has piles or piers and the openings submerge so that the flow is in contact with
the deck then the obstructive effects of the piers and deck are considered separately, the latter
being cons idered under the submergence heading below. How the piers are treated when there
is submergence depends upon whether sluice gate or drowned orifice flow is experienced (Fig.
2.6 and Section 2.4). If only the upstream face of the openings is submerged (type 3 sluice
gate flow) then again J=AP /A 3 where AP is only the submerged area of the piers or piles
projected on the plane of section 3 (the area of the deck is not included) while A3 is the gross
area of section 3. If the upstream and downstream faces of the openings are submerged (type
1 drowned orifice flow) then

(4.14)

where AP is only the area of piers or piles projected onto section 3 (the area of the deck is not
included), and aW3 is the gross area below the soffit of the deck, i.e. the gross area of the
openings at section 3.
The USGS method assumes a single opening; it may have several spans supported by piers
or piles, but it is one opening nevertheless with only one pair of abutments. In contrast, a
multiple-opening contraction (Fig. 4.16) typically has more than one pair of abutments, which
are connected by an embankment within the river channel (an ‘interior’ embankment). Thus a
multiple-opening embankment was defined by Matthai (1967) as ‘a series of independent
single-opening contractions, all of which freely conduct water from a common approach
channel ’.
The procedure for determining the discharge through a multiple-opening contraction is
basically to split the channel into separate subchannels or subsections (each with its own
single-opening contraction), calculate the discharge through each opening using the
techniques already described, and then add the discharges to obtain the total. When splitting
the channel, the larger openings are assigned a longer length of embankment in direct
proportion to the gross area (A 3) of their waterway openings. The dividing lines are then
projected upstream. As usual section 1 is located one opening width upstream but, if the
multiple openings have different spans, this means that each subchannel has section 1 in a
different place so the

Page 128

Fig. 4.16 Diagram illustrating a multiple-opening constriction. The length of interior embankment
within the subchannels is in proportion to the gross area of the openings. (After Matthai,
1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

upstream water level (H1) has to be obtained at several locations within the channel. On the
out side of the channel this often means using observed or high-water (trash) marks. Interior
values have to be estimated from the corresponding observed or high-water marks on the
upstream face of the interior embankments (HS ) as follows:

(4.15)

where all the quantities are for a psuedo single -opening channel at section 1: a1 is the
dimensionless velocity coefficient; Q1, A 1 and K1 are the discharge (m3 /s), cross-sectional area
of flow (m 2) and conveyance (m3/s); g is the acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s); and L1−2 is
the distance (m) between sections 1 and 2. Unfortunately the discharge has to be assumed and
verified by later calculations. The downstream level (H3) has to be measured at each opening
to determine ∆h for that particular waterway.

Submergence
This condition occurs when the water level rises above the top of the opening(s) and the
bridge deck causes an obstruction to the flow. It is assumed that there is no flow over the deck,
approach embankments or around the bridge. The vertical distance between the water level at
sect ion 1 and the lowest horizontal member of the submerged part of the bridge deck is the
distance T in Fig. 4.17. The degree, of submergence is defined by

Page 129

(4.16)

This ratio is used to obtain the value of the submergence adjustment factor, k T, from Fig. 4.17,
which is then used with equations 4.10 and 4.5 to calculate Q . Note that submergence usually
does not occur until Yu/Z>1.1 or, more specifically here, when the bridge submergence
ratio>0.08. If kT< 1.00 then submergence is assumed; when estimating the friction losses in
the approach reach and through the bridge add the full length of the deck to the wetted
perimeter, even with type 3 sluice gate flow (Fig. 2.6) where only part of the opening is
running full. This is said to give a better estimate of the friction losses that occur at high
discharges.
With type 2 flow where all of the deck beams are in contact with the water, the discharge
coefficient (C) obtained from equation 4.10 using all of the adjustment factors (including kT)
may be nearly 1.00. Matthai (1967) advised that after all adjustment factors have been applied
the maximum value of C should be restricted to the value of kT obtained from Fig. 4.17.

Fig. 4.17 USGS adjustment factor, kT, for the bridge submergence ratio. (After Matthai, 1967.
Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

Page 130

Additionally with drowned orifice flow where both the upstream and downstream faces of the
opening are submerged and the deck is fully in contact with the water use the following:
k T=1.0 and A3=(bY3−A D) where AD is the cross-sectional area of the submerged deck.
It appears that the USGS technique struggles to find a consistent procedure for dealing with
submerged flows, necessitating several minor adjustments according to circumstance. The
USBPR technique is simpler in this respect and uses equations 2.8 and 2.9.

Spur dykes, ka, k b, kd
Spur dykes (guide walls) are rare in Britain but frequently used elsewhere with large rivers.
When dealing with wide floodplains they can help to funnel the flow through the opening.
Although not included in the original study, Matthai presented adjustment factors for use with
the USGS method. These are included in Section 7.4 and Figs 7.13 and 7.14.

Summary and example
Table 4.2 provides a summary of the steps involved when applying the USGS method to
calculate the discharge at a contraction. Example 4.1 is a numerical application of the
technique.

4.2.2 Backwater analysis

This approach to the estimation of backwater was described by Tracy and Carter (1955). The
difference in water level between sections 1 and 3 is given by

Page 131

Table 4.2 Summary of the steps in the application of the USGS method to calculate peak discharge

This is an iterative procedure since (for some types of opening) the Froude number has to be estimated
in step 7 and the velocity head evaluated before the discharge can be calculated.
1. For the stage under consideration, draw a plan of the site showing water levels, including a
longitudinal section along each bank and across the upstream and downstream faces of the
constriction. Draw cross-sections of the abutments and sections 1 and 3.
2. Determine the average water surface elevations at sections 1 and 3 and determine the fall, ∆h .
3. For short bridges, measure the span (b) in the field; otherwise measure from the plan. Superimpose
b on section 1, generally keeping the centre of the low water channel in the same relative position
but incorporating the thalweg within b . The full width, b, is used regardless of skew. Measure the
length of the waterway (L) and calculate the value of L/b .
4. Split section 1 into subsections using vertical dividing lines at the edges of the opening and where
abrupt changes in hydraulic radius occur. Calculate the areas and wetted perimeters of the
subsections, plus the total area.
5. For section 1, calculate the conveyances of the sections corresponding to b (i.e. Kb ) and to either
side (Ka and Kc). For the calculation of eccentricity, Ka should be the smaller. Calculate M=Kb /K.
6. Determine the type of abutments (I–IV) and their dimensions and slope.
7. For section 3, calculate the areas and wetted perimeters, if necessary splitting the channel at the
edge of each pier or pile bent or at abrupt changes of hydraulic radius. Compute the conveyance of
each subsection. Assuming a3 = 1.0, calculate the Froude number, F3=Q/A3 (gY3 )1/2.
8. From the M and L/b values obtain C ' from the base curve appropriate to the type of opening.
9. Calculate the values of the appropriate adjustment factors from the secondary curves.
10. Obtain the value of C from steps 8 and 9 and equation 4.10.
11. Calculate Q from equation 4.5.
12. Calculate the mean velocities at sections 1 and 3; check they are reasonable. Calculate the Froude
numbers, F1 and F3 ; they must be less than 0.8 for a valid analysis.
13. Compare Q and F3 from steps 11 and 12 with the values in step 7: perform additional iterations as
necessary.

sent the average value in the channel reaches both upstream and downstream of the
constriction.
3. Obtain the value of the backwater ratio
from Fig. 4.18.
4. Obtain the value of the coefficient of discharge of the opening (i.e. C for types I –IV) and
also the equivalent value (Cbasic ) for the basic condition of an opening with a vertical face
and squar e-edged abutments (i.e. type I with no rounding or wingwalls). Calculate C/Cbasic
and obtain the value of k c from Fig. 4.19.
5. Adjust the value of
(from step 3) for constriction geometry by multiplying
it by the value of kc.

6. Calculate the value of ∆h corresponding to Q from equation 4.5 or 4.9.
7. Multiply the adjusted backwater ratio

Page 132

Page 133

Fig. 4.19 USGS backwater ratio adjustment factor, kc , which allows for any deviation from the basic
constriction geometry of Fig. 4.18. Here C is the coefficient of discharge of the opening
type under investigation and C basic is the coefficient of a type I opening with a vertical face,
square-edged abutments, and the same opening ratio, M. If the ratio C/C basic is known, kc
can be obtained from the diagram. The adjusted backwater ratio is

Page 134

may determine the stage-discharge relationship. The coefficients and adjustments factors
then cannot be applied (see also Section 3.11).
2. The method should not be applied where the difference in the elevation of the water surface
betw een sections 1 and 3 (i.e. ∆h) is less than 150mm.
3. As mentioned earlier, ∆h should be greater than 4 hF. Problems are encountered with
heavily vegetated floodplains, which give rise to large values of hF.
4. The bridge geometry should be close to the s tandard types, and the flow conditions should
be similar. The flow must be subcritical throughout.
5. In many situations, such as when designing a new bridge, the water levels at sections 1 and
3 (i.e. H1 and H3), and hence ∆h, are all initially unknown (Fig. 2.3). One approach is to
assume a value for Q, calculate ∆h from equation 4.5 or 4.9, obtain
using the procedure
in Section 4.2.2, evaluate SOL1−3 and then use equation 4.17 to obtain
.
6. It is apparent from Section 4.2.2 and the above that the USGS method is rather clumsy
when it is used to evaluate afflux or when the water levels at sections 1 and 3 are unknown.
The fact that the calculations do not easily relate to normal depth conditions can be a
disadvantage.
The USGS method is best at what it was designed for, estimating the flow from observations
of the water level at sections 1 and 3 (the USBPR method provides a more direct means of
calculating afflux). Despite the limitations above, this is one of the most reliable and
comprehensive investigations of flow through a contraction (see also Section 4.6).

4.3 US Bureau of Public Roads (USBPR) method

This may also be known as either the BPR or DT (Department of Transport) method. It was
principally concerned with the evaluation of bridge backwater, and is based on a
comprehensive laboratory study (Liu, et al., 1957), which was verified by field measurements.
Bradley (1978) produced a detailed report that described how to calculate the afflux
(backwater) under normal depth conditions. The report included many useful examples. It
also considered skew, eccentricity, the abnormal stage condition, dual bridges, situations
where the flow passes through critical depth, the difference in water level across the
embankments, and submergence of the opening. Consequently it can be applied to a wide
range of problems. Importa nt limitations are that it is not very suitable for irregular channels,
there is no discharge equation for a bridge experiencing channel flow (but there is for the
submerged condition), and arch bridges were not considered.
Essentially the USBPR method as sumes normal depth in a uniform channel so the water
surface is parallel to the bed, and then calculates the additional afflux caused by introducing a
bridge into the flow (in the laboratory the afflux was measured). Basically all that is required
to calcu late the afflux is

the bridge opening ratio (M), the normal depth velocity head at section 2 (i.e.

Page 135

datum level, so SOL1−4=hL and cancels. However, the introduction of a bridge into the uniform
flow creates an additional energy loss, hb, thus:

Page 136

(4.20)

The energy loss due to the bridge can be expressed in terms of a coefficient and the reference
velocity head:

Page 137

Fig. 4.20 USBPR nomogram for estimating the value of the velocity distribution coefficient at section
2 (i.e. a 2) from a 1 and M (after Bradley, 1978). For example, if a 1=2.6 and M =0.7, then a2
has a value of about 2.1. The diagram is only a rough guide and large variations are
possible.

abutments ( Fig. 4.21). Incremental coefficients are then added to allow for eccentricity
skew
, and bridge piers
. Thus

,

Page 138

Fig 4.21 Variation of the USBPR base coefficient,
, with opening ratio, M, and abutment geometry
(after Bradley, 1978). The curve appropriate to the abutment type and span, b, should be
used as follows:

top curve
middle curve
lower curve

90° wingwall abutments with b<60 m (i.e. high energy loss)
30° wingwall abutments with b<60 m
all 45° and 60° wingwall abutments (i.e. low energy loss)
all spillthrough abutments
all bridges with b>60 m.

Fig. 4.22 USBPR variation of the incremental backwater coefficient for eccentricity,
(after Bradley, 1978). The coefficient should be added to the base coefficient,

, with M
.

where Qa and Qc represent the discharge obstructed by the bridge outside the projected width
b, the smaller of the two values always being the numerator (e.g. Fig. 3.1e). If e>0.20 no
correction is required, but if e< 0.20 then the incremental coefficient,
, can be obtained
from Fig. 4.22, which shows the variation of
with M. The greatest energy loss, and hence
largest
value, is experienced where the contraction occurs only on one side of the
channel: that is, with the fully eccentric condition where X a=0 in Fig. 3.1e , Qa=0 and e=0.

Page 139

Skew (angularity),

Page 140

Fig. 4.23 USBPR variation of the incremental backwater coefficient for skew (angularity),
M (after Bradley, 1978): (a) for abutments parallel to the flow; (b) for abutments
perpendicular to the embankment.

, with

Page 141

Fig. 4.24 USBPR diagram to determine the skewed span (bs) required to give the same backwater as
an opening of width b perpendicular to the direction of the approaching flow (after Bradley,
1978). The graph is applicable only to openings with abutments parallel to the flow as in
Fig. 4.23a.

Second, correct for the fact that M≠1.0 by entering part (b) with the correct M value, moving
down to the line representing the pier type, then across to obtain the correction factor, σ. Then

(4.27)

Bradley advised that the backwater coefficients for pile bents could effectively be considered
independent of the diameter, width or spacing of the piles but should be increased when a bent
has more than five piles. A ten-pile bent should have a value of
about 20% higher than
the standard five-pile bent in the diagrams. Any sway bracing should be included in the width
of pile bents. To allow for trash collecting on the piers use a larger value of J.
W ith skewed crossings the procedure is basically the same as above but the width of the
piers and piles is calculated on a plane that is perpendicular to the general flow direction (Fig
4.25). The total area of the piers (AP ) is the sum of the individual areas.

Spur dykes
These are considered in detail in Section 7.4.

Page 142

Fig. 4.25 USBPR incremental backwater coefficient for piers,
(after Bradley, 1978). First, the
value of ∆k. for the appropriate pier type is found from the main diagram (a), which
assumes M =1.0. Second, the value of σis obtained from inset diagram (b) using the true
value of M and the pier type. Third, the value of
is obtained from

Page 143

Table 4.3 Summary of the USBPR procedure for estimating the maximum bridge afflux with normal
depth

The last steps are iterative because the full solution requires in step 13 the value of A 1 (which
includes
) before the afflux,
, is known.

1. Determine the magnitude of the flood for which the bridge is being designed, Q.
2. Determine the river stage at the design discharge. This would be the normal depth, YN, unless an
abnormal stage is experienced.
3. Plot the natural channel cross-section under the proposed bridge and superimpose the design river
stage from step 2. At section 2, perpendicular to the flow direction, calculate the gross area of the
opening (including any piers) between the normal water surface and the river bed, AN2. Thus
.
4. Project the opening area (AN2 ) upstream to section 1, which must be perpendicular to the general
flow direction; centre AN2 on the main channel if necessary. Check that skew is dealt with
correctly.
5. At section 1, plot a representative cross-section and subdivide it where there is a marked change in
depth of flow and/or roughness and at the edges of the projected opening. Calculate the
conveyance and discharge in each subsection, and the total conveyance and discharge.
6. Calculate the bridge opening ratio, M, from equation 3 .1 or 3.5.
7. Determine the value of a 1 (equations 3.17–3.19). Estimate a 2 from Fig. 4.20 and allow for
anything that may alter the value, such as vegetation.
8. Obtain the value of the base coefficient,
, for normal symmetrical crossings from Fig. 4.21.
9.
If the bridge is eccentric, calculate the value of e from equation 4.25 and determine the value of
the incremental coefficient

If the stage is abnormal then the asumptions inherent in the USBPR method (e.g. uniform
flow, constant cross -section) are no longer valid, so

Page 144

theoretically the procedure above is no longer applicable. Therefore, Bradley (1978) presented
the results of a limited model study (scale 1:40, SO=0.0012, n=0.024), which allowed an
approximate solution for afflux with abnormal flow. In fact, th is study suggested that the
procedure adopted for normal depth flow could also be applied to abnormal flow, with two
modifications. One is that the reference velocity head used in the afflux equation must relate
to the abnormal stage condition (subscript A ). The second is that the last term of equation
4.23 is no longer appropriate, so the new equation for the maximum backwater is

downstream side of a proposed structure ( Y3). To facilitate this a model study was undertaken
of bridges that were perpendicular to the flow and without piers, eccentricity or skew so
can be represented by
, which is evaluated from

Page 145

Page 146

(4.31)

normal crossing for any given value of M (remember that the projected width is used to
calculate M). This means that Fig. 4.26 can be used as

before with the normal bridge afflux

, so for bridges with or without piers:

Page 147

Page 148

conducting a hydraulic analysis, and requires the exercise of judgement. The USBPR study
considered only identical parallel crossings arranged perpendicular to the flow, there being
too many possible combinations to do otherwise. Most of the tests were conducted on 45°
wingwall abutments with a few spillthrough types being included, all with embankment
slopes of 1 vertical to 1.5 horizontal. However, there are some limited guidelines, which are
described below.

Backwater
With dual carriageways it is quite common to have virtually identical bridges a short distance
apart (Fig. 4.28). This results in a larger afflux than for a single bridge, but less than that
obtained by considering the two bridges separately. This rule of thumb should be remembered
when dealing with bridges that are not identical.
When the two bridges are near together the flow pattern is similar to that for a single
opening, but slightly elongated. However, as the distance between the bridges increases the
expanding jet from the first opening encounters the embankment of the second bridge and has
to contract and then expand again. This results in additional turbulence and loss of energy, so
the afflux upstream of the two bridges is larger than for a single structure. The water level
between the two bridges is usually above the normal stage, and is higher than it would be with
just the upstream bridge. The water level downstream of the second bridge is lower than it
would be if only the upstream bridge existed.

Fig. 4.28 Longitudinal section through a site with dual bridges (after Bradley, 1978). If normal depth
conditions existed initially, the water surface profile resulting from a single bridge (the one
furthest upstream) is shown by the dashed line and dual bridges by the solid line. Note that
the second (downstream) bridge increases the water level everywhere upstream of it, but
lowers the level immediately downstream.

The maximum afflux due to the upstream bridge by itself is
, and is defined as before.
is the maximum combined afflux due to the dual bridges, also measured upstream of the
first bridge. Having established
using the method described previously, the combined
afflux for the dual crossing, measured upstream of the first bridge, is

Page 149

second opening (Fig. 4.28). The difference in the water level between the upstream side of the
first bridge and the downstream side of the second is

Page 150

can be calculated, if desired.

4.3.5 Flow passes through critical depth

Bradley (1978) pointed out that if the backwater calculated for a bridge on a river with a fairly
steep gradient appears to be unrealistic, then this may indicate that the flow has passed
through critical depth and is of either type type 5 or type 6 (Fig. 2.6). In this case an
alternative method of analysis to that described above has to be adopted. Bradley outlined
such a method based on a laboratory study that covered only a limited range of M and which
did not take into acco unt the effect of piers, eccentricity or skew. The tentative result of this
simplified analysis is summarised in Fig. 4.31, which shows the variation of the total critical
depth backwater coefficient,
, with M. There are no incremental coefficients. Thus the
a fflux for type 5 or 6 flow is

Fig. 4.30 Variation of the USBPR differential level multiplication factor for dual bridges with the
distance between the bridges expressed as L D/L (after Bradley, 1978). The dashed part of
the curve denotes uncertainty. The factor is used with equation 4.40 to calculate the water
level downstream of the second bridge.

Page 151

Fig. 4.31 Tentative USBPR curve for the variation of the total critical depth backwater coefficient
with M. (After Bradley, 1978)

(4.41)

where V2C is the critical velocity (m/s) in the constriction=Q/A2C; A2C is the net area of flow
(m) between the bed and the water surface with critical flow (=bY2C for a rectangular
waterway of width b); Y2C is the critical depth (m) in the constriction, i.e. (Q2/gb2)1/3 for a
rectangular waterway; YN2 is the depth (m) in the waterway assuming normal depth at section
2 (=A N2/ b for a rectangular waterway); α2 and a1 are the velocity distribution coefficients
(dimensionless) for the constriction and the approach section; and the other variables are as
before. Note that in the absence of an incremental coefficient for bridge piers, the net cross-
sectional area at section 2 should be used instead of the gross area.
Equation 4.41 is derived by equating the energy at section 1 to the energy at the section in
the constriction at which the water surface passes through the critical depth, Y2C. This
recognises that the backwater is no longer influenced by the conditions downstream (see
Section 3.3).
With type 7 flow (Fig. 2.6) there is no backwater in theory. Additionally, it is questionable
whether any obstruction should be placed in a channel where the flow is supercritical
throughout. This condition is rarely met in practice.

4.3.6 Calculation of discharge (stage -discharge analysis)

The USBPR method does not include a discharge equation as such for open channel flow
(although equations are given for submerged openings: see equations 2.8–2.10). However, the
relationship between the upstream stage (Y1) and discharge can be obtained easily because the
afflux
is calculated above normal depth (YN) and
. The procedure is to

Page 152

assume a discharge, Q, and then calculate the corresponding YN using the Manning equation;
calculate the afflux,
. This can be repeated
for other discharges to obtain the stage-discharge relationship.
A similar procedure can be devised for the abnormal stage condition, but at any discharge it
would be necessary to use the abnormal profile without the bridge instead of normal depth.

4.3.7 Limitations on the use of the USBPR method

One of the strengths of this method is that it uses normal depth, which is often the only thing
that can be calculated easily (although not necessarily accurately) at the start of an analysis.
Consequently the absence of a discharge equation for the channel flow condition is not a
problem, since it is easy to calculate the stage-discharge relationship upstream of the bridge,
afflux included. However, for a valid analysis the conditions on site must resemble those in
the laboratory, where there was a straight, uniform channel between sections 1 and 4. Most
natural channels do not meet these cri -teria, and at some site s the bed level can be so variable
that depth becomes meaningless. Under these conditions it may be difficult to apply the
USBPR method, and if it is used there must be some question as to the accuracy and veracity
of the result. Similarly, with overbank flow on wide heavily vegetated floodplains the
calculated backwater may have to be multiplied by about 2 to obtain the true value (Kaatz and
James, 1997). This was one of the adverse conditions described at the start of the chapter.
Despite its limitations the USBPR method provides a relatively quick and easy way to
calculate the afflux due to a bridge, which is exactly what it was designed for. The fact that
dual bridges, abnormal stages and flows that pass through critical depth are considered is an
advan tage, although these aspects of the study were very limited so the results have to be used
cautiously. On the other hand, the USGS method was intended mainly to calculate discharges
from observed water levels, and the process for estimating afflux was rath er laborious. Thus
the two methods complement each other. The accuracy that can be achieved is discussed
further in Section 4.6.

4.4 Biery and Delleur

This study by Biery and Delleur (1962) is one of the few specifically concerned with the
hydraulics of arch bridges, and consequently provides some useful but limited information
about their hydraulic performance. Unfortunately skew, eccentricity, entrance rounding, piers
and abnormal stages were not considered. The effect of skew on the flow through arch bridges
was subsequently investigated by Husain and Rao (1966), but they did not produce any usable
results.

Page 153

Fig. 4.32 Biery and Delleur’s (1962) curves showing the variation of the backwater ratio (Y 1/YN) with
M and normal depth Froude number (FN). Use diagram (a) with Y 1/YN <1.50 and diagram
(b) with Y1/Y N=1.50−2.50. (From Hydraulics of single span arch bridge constrictions,
Proceedings of the ASCE. Reproduced by permission of ASCE)

Page 154

The research paper by Biery and Delleur is confusing at times and lacks clear examples, so
the method is not easy to apply. The laboratory study is not supported by much in the way of
comparison with prototype data. Another disadvantage is that the calculations use the normal
depth Froude number (F N or F4) so that all the reservations expressed previously about the
validity of Froude numbers in complex channels apply here.
Biery and Delleur presented equations for the calculation of the backwater ratio [Y1/YN], but
the graphs in Fig. 4.32 appear to be a better alternative. Thus if YN, M and F N have been
calculated and [Y1/YN] is evaluated from the graphs then Y1 can be obtained:

Page 155

Fig. 4.34 Distance between the sections of maximum (1) and minimum (3) water level (L 1−3/ b) as a
function of M and waterway length (L/b). (After Biery and Delleur, 1962 ; Hydraulics of
single span arch bridge constrictions, Proceedings of the ASCE . Reproduced by permission
of ASCE)

where Y1A is the abnormal stage without the bridge and Y1 is the depth including the afflux.
Figure 4.33 shows the distance from the section of maximum afflux to the bridge face
(L1−2), while Fig. 4.34 indicates the distance between the section of maximum afflux and the
section with the minimum water surface elevation (L1−3). In the former case similar graphs are
available from other publications (e.g. Bradley, 1978), but not from measurements involving
arched waterways, although there is no obvious reason why the waterway shape should be
significant.
The discharge (Q m 3/s) through a two -dimensional semicircular arch in a rectangular
channel can be calculated from the upstream depth, thus:

(4.45)

where C D is the Biery and Delleur coefficient of discharge (dimensionless), g is the
acceleration due to gravity (9.81m/s), Y1 is the depth of flow (m) including the afflux at the
section of maximum afflux, b is opening width (m) at the springline of the arch, and r is the
radius of curvature (m) of the arch. The value of CD can be obtained from Fig. 4.35, where FN
is the normal depth Froude number in the rough rectangular channel calculated from equation
3.10 and M is the bridge opening ratio. When applied to Canns Mill, where there was an
abnormal stage, Hamill (1993) obtained more accurate results using Y1A instead of Y1 in
equation 4.45, although this may not always be the case (see Section 4.6 and Example 4.3).

Page 156

Fig. 4.35 Variation of the Biery and Delleur (1962) coefficient of discharge (CD) for two -dimensional
semicircular arch models with M and normal depth Froude number (FN). (From Hydraulics
of single span arch bridge constrictions, Proceedings of the ASCE . Reproduced by
permission of ASCE)

Limitations of this method include the ones mentioned earlier: it is applicable only to normal,
centrally located, square -edged single-span openings in a channel flowing at the normal depth.
The values of both M and F N must be calculated under all conditions, which is a disadvantage
since these variables can be difficult to estimate accurately. The method is not very user
friendly, since the original research paper is relatively long at 34 pages and can be confusing.
However, the discharge equation and graphs for the backwater ratio have been applied to
Canns Mill with some success, and despite the numerous limitations under some
circumst ances this method appears to work quite well.

4.5 Hydraulics Research (HR) method

This investigation by Hydraulics Research, Wallingford, England, included a laboratory study
of single and multispan arched openings with the objective of evaluating the af flux (Brown,
1985, 1989). The theoretical background stems from an analogy between the blockage effect
of channel flow past smooth circular cylinders and afflux at bridge obstructions (Ranga Raju
et al., 1983; Brown, 1989). A laboratory investigation was undertaken that included the
performance of single semicircular arches, single elliptical

Page 157

arches, multiple semicircular arches and multiple semicircular arches with different soffit
levels. These structures were tested either at normal depth or by introducing a low flow down
the channel and then (at the same discharge) incrementally increasing the height of the
tailgate to vary the depth of flow. The laboratory results were compared with field
measurements from selected bridges, but the accuracy of some of this data is perhaps
questionable.
Details of the investigation and its application are not as comprehensive or helpful as those
relating to the USBPR or USGS methods. In the 1985 report afflux is defined rather vaguely
as ‘the difference in river level either side of the bridge’ and as ‘the difference between the
upstream and gauged heads measured furthest from the bridge’. Adopting the notation of
prevous chapters, the investigation produced charts showing the relationship between

Page 158

Fig. 4.36 HR method afflux ratio curves applicable to all bridges, showing the variation of
with
F4 and downstream blockage ratio, J4 . (After Brown, 1989. Reproduced by permission of
the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food)

means of calculating the discharge from observed water levels, unlike most of the other
methods, and the arches o f a multispan bridge must be ‘separated only by typical pier widths’.
It is not clear how this method should be applied to sites with compound channels and
extensive floodplains, since the laboratory investigation and the worked examples relate to a
rectan gular section. At Canns Mill the values obtained for the blockage ratio during flood
were unreasonable and off the scale of the charts, basically for the

Page 159

Fig. 4.37 HR curves applicable to all single arches, showing the variation of
with F4 and
upstream blockage ratio, J1. (After Brown, 1989. Reproduced by permission of the Ministry
of Agriculture Fisheries and Food)

reasons described in Section 3.2 regarding the calculation of M values. To obtain an accurate
solution, a rectangular main channel without the floodplains was assumed, while retaining the
stage -discharge relationship recorded in the field. Thus the compound channel was effectively
turned into a stylized laboratory channel (see Example 4.4). This must be regarded as a
dubious practice, particularly if there is a large flow over the floodplains, which may not work
everywhere. At Canns Mill the answers were already known, of course, a luxury not usually
a vailable. Consequently

Page 160

Fig. 4.38 HR curves applicable to all multiple arches, showing the variation of

Page 161

may be unreliable over part of the range of flow, when averaged a reasonably accurate result
may be obtained.
Regardless of how the hydraulic analysis of a bridge is undertaken, it is important that the
input data are accurate and that the flow characteristics of th e site during flood are closely
observed. Without well -positioned water level recording equipment backed up by personal
observation during flood, it may be the input data rather than the analytical method itself that
causes inaccurate results.
When considering the accuracy of the various methods, the potential sources of error in any
analysis should be remembered.
• Errors in the field data. An inspection of the discharge equations shows that Q is directly
proportional to the cross-sectional area of flow, A. Hence a 5% error in A results in a 5%
error in discharge. Scouring of the bed during flood could change the area. Although the
error depends upon the equation used and the flow condition, typically a 5% error in
measuring the difference in water level across the bridge results in a 2% error in the
calculated discharge and a 5% error in afflux.
• Errors in calculated variables such as F and M. These have a less direct effect on accuracy
than some of the field data. The error again depends upon the equat ion used and the flow
condition, but typically a 5% error in F produces an error of 1% in Q. At the maximum
discharge a 5% error in M can result in a 1% error in the calculated Q and a 4% error in
afflux (sometimes much more).
• Errors inherent in the theoretical equations. The equations only approximate the flow
phenomena concerned, and are unlikely to reflect accurately the prototype performance
over the whole range of flow. In other words, even if the field data are totally accurate an
error may still be incurred. This will be most significant when an equation or model is used
outside its recommended range, or under conditions for which the model has not been
verified using field data.
• Errors in the empirical coefficients (used with the equations) and charts, and the difficulty of
drawing, printing and reading such charts precisely.
• Differences between the laboratory and prototype conditions, and scale effects. All the
methods of analysis are based on laboratory studies, which may not truly reflect the site or
conditions being analysed. All hydraulic models are compromises, so scale effects are
inherent.
It is difficult to obtain reliable field data, as opposed to laboratory data, against which to test
various methods of hydraulic analysis. In this respect Canns Mill Bridge is relatively unique
since its hydraulic performance has been closely observed and recorded for many years,
providing an ideal opportunity to test some of the standard methods (Hamill, 1993). The
results indicated that it is possible to undertake a reasonably successful analysis using only
relatively limited survey data and simple calculations,

Page 162

without having to rely on sophisticated computer programs (see Examples 4.1–4.4). Indeed,
some of these calculations can be used to provide a quick check on the output from such
programs.
When applying the methods of analysis described above to Canns Mill, all had to be
modified to some extent, to make them applicable either to arched openings or to abnormal
flow conditions, or both. In general, these modifications appear to have been successful, but it
should be remembered that Canns Mill is a segmental arch bridge which experiences an
abnormal stage and relatively low Froude numbers (in the region of 0.3 or less). If the same
techniques are applied to a bridge or site that is significantly different, the same accuracy may
not be obtained.
It is not easy to define what constitutes a successf ul or accurate hydraulic analysis of a
bridge during flood. Arguably, anything that estimates the discharge to within about 10%
could be considered very good. Gauging a flood from a bridge with a velocity meter is
unlikely to be more accurate (if this is a ttempted a careful study of the isovels must be
undertaken first, particularly with arch bridges; such a study was conducted for Canns Mill).
Similarly, any method that can estimate the afflux during flood to within 25mm is probably
performing better than could reasonably be expected. After all, the water surface is likely to
be fluctuating by much more than this anyway (see Fig. 2.7 ). Of course, because Canns Mill
Brid ge has been so closely observed it is much easier to conduct an accurate analysis of this
structure than of any other. Frequently sites have to be analysed without the benefit of a
detailed knowledge of their hydraulic performance, so less accurate answers than those
described below should be expected.
The results from all the methods of analysis are shown in Table 4.5. As an indication of the
relative accuracy achieved, the root mean squared (rms) deviations of the calculated results
from the values in Table 4.5 are shown in Tables 4.6a (afflux) and 4.6b (discharge) for the
three flow conditions: channel flow, sluice gate flow, and orifice flow. It should be noted that
these figures are not always based on the same number of results, and that the rms deviation
obtained is always positive regardless of whether the results are larger or smaller than the true
values. The rms deviation for the whole range of flow has also been calculated, as has the
average value for all of the methods.
Considering first the calculated discharges, it is apparent from Tables 4.5 and 4.6b that all
of the methods produced answers within 10% over at least part of the range of flows. The
worst results were obtained from the USBPR drowned orifice equation, but this is often the
case since it is difficult to obtain accurate values of the coefficient of discharge (see Fig. 2.12)
because small differences in fluctuating wa ter levels have to be measured. The best results
were obtained from the USGS technique. This is not too surprising, since the principal
purpose of this investigation was to enable the peak discharge to be obtained by using the
bridge constriction as a discharge meter.

Page 163

Table 4.5 Comparison of observed and calculated results

Observed values

USBPR

USGS

Biery and Delleur

HR

Discharge
(m3/s)

Afflux
(mm)

Afflux
eqn
4.23
(mm)

Discharge
eqn 2.8
(m3/s)

Discharge
eqn 2.9
(m3/s)

Afflux
eqn
4.18
(mm)

Discharge
eqn 4.5
(m3/s)

Afflux
(graph)
(mm)

Discharge
eqn 4.45
(m3/s)

Afflux
upstream
ratio
(mm)

Afflux
downstream
ratio (mm)

2.4
4.5
5.8
7.0
8.3
9.5
10.8
12.5
13.8
15

3
5
11
17
45
72
115
175
220
270

4
7
11
17
27
40
64
119
195
269

−
–
–
–
−
8.21
11.37
13.50s
14.833
16.023

− 1 a
2 a
–
–
3 a
–
8 a
6.15 a
17a
7.67 a
34a
9.26 a
68
10.85
137
12.45
211
14.01
288

1.84a
3.88a
4.82a
6.29a
8.02a
10.01a
11.44
12.71
13.7
14.7

28
31
27
42
100
114
130
183
220
282

2.07
3.81
5.11
6.08
10.54
11.48
12.22
13.09
13.82
14.41

−
–
–
30
51
83
112
164
209
255

−
–
14
19
52
77
107
160
202
260

a Equation used outside recommended range of application
Hamill (1993); reproduced with permission, Institution of Civil Engineers

Table 4.6 Root mean square (rms) deviations of the results in Table 4.5

Root mean square deviation

Page 164

Page 165

This being so, the USBPR technique has the merit of being relatively simple and easy to apply.
Whether or not to apply the USGS technique may depend upon the availability of accurate
values for the Froude number and the difference in water level between sections 1 and 3. The
Biery and Delleur method was not easy to apply because of the use of the Froude number and
the fact that by using slightly different approaches within the same general guidelines it was
possible to obtain a range of results. As for the HR method, this technique was applied in such
a way as to obtain results in agreement with the field data. The first attempts at using the
method were totally unsuccessful due to the difficulty of defining the blockage ratio; the wide
compound channel had to be treated like a simple channel equal in width to the bridge
structure without its approach embankments (see Example 4.4). However, at Canns Mill it did
reproduce the afflux very well, so if experience can be built up regarding how to apply the
technique to complex sites and confidence in the method established, then it could provide a
very quick and easy method of calculating afflux.
Kaatz and James (1997) analysed the backwater at nine different bridge sites during 13
flood events using four one -dimensional flow models: the modified Bradley method and three
computer models (the HEC-2 normal bridge method, the HEC-2 special bridge method, and
WSPRO). All of the sites had wide, flat heavily vegetated floodplains, where subcritical
channel flow occurred. These are the adverse conditions described at the start of the chapter
that are outside the range of the Bradley (USBPR) method, so it is not surprising that this
technique resulted in the average computed backwater for all events being 51% less than the
measured value. Individual values ranged from about 0.1 to 0.8 of the actual values. However,
it was observed that the accuracy improved as the velocity in the constriction increased. Of
course, this raises the question as to whether normal or abnormal stages were experienced at
the sites and how they were analysed. However, perhaps the tentative conclusion is that under
the conditions described above the backwater obtained from the USBPR method should be
doubled, with possibly a larger factor being used if the velocities are very low and the
conditions extreme. To put this in perspective, WSPRO produced an average backwater 31%
greater than the true values; the range of individual results was about 0.65–2.65. With the
HEC-2 special bridge method the average was 26% less with a range of about 0.30–1.25, and
with the normal method an average 2% less with a range of about 0.40–1.75. In the latter case,
this would have been 36% higher had the recommended 1:4 downstream expansion been
adopted (Hydrologic Engineering Center, 1990). Thus all of the methods produced a wide
range of results, so under these conditions all of the models can be quite inaccurate. It should
not be assumed that similar accuracy would be obtained at sites with completely different
characteristics.

Page 166

As stated at the begining of this section, if accuracy is required then use more than one
method of analysis. Engineering judgement and common sense must also be applied.

4.7 Examples

An example is given below of each of the four methods of analysis described in this chapter.
For brevity, they build on previous examples and only illustrate the general principle of how
the calculations proceed; there are too many possible combinations to include every aspect.

Example 4.1: the USGS method

A bridge with an opening 10m wide (=b) spans the main channel analysed in Example 3.2 and
shown in Fig. 3.12. The bridge has vertical embankments and vertical abutments with no
entrance rounding or skew. The opening is 5m high. The observed depth at section 1 (10m
upstream from the face o$f the bridge) is 4.175m while that at section 3 at the waterway exit
is 3.807 m. The slope of the channel is 1:1000 and the normal depth YN is 4 m. (a) Calculate
the discharge corresponding to the observed water levels, (b) Check the validity of the
observed water levels by calculating the afflux

Page 167

Fig. 4.39 Example 4.1: (a) plan of channel and crossing; (b) details of abutments; (c) longitudinal
section.

5. From Example 3.2, Ka=298m3/s, Kb=2302m3 /s and Kc=500m3 /s. The total conveyance of
the channel is K=(298+2302+500)=3100 m3/s so from equation 3.5 the opening ratio, M is

Page 168

6. The bridge corresponds to type I abutments and embankments.
7. In this simple example, section 3 is a rectangle 10.000m wide by 3.807m deep. With
opening types where the coefficient of discharge is a function of the Froude number (F) the
calculations below generally have to be repeated several times, since it is necessary to
guess a discharge in order to calculate the Froude number. Say the discharge (Q) is
98.030m3/s, then

8. From Fig. 4.3a if M=0.743 and L/b=1.000 then C'=0.950.
9. With F=0.421, from Fig. 4.3b the adjustment factor for the Froude number is kF=0.982.
The eccentricity of the opening is e=Ka/ Kc=298/500=0.596. From Table 4.1 it is
apparent that no adjustment factor is needed. There is no entrance rounding, skew or
submergence (4.175m<5.000m) so these factors are not needed.
10. From equation 4.10, C=C'×kF=0.950×0.982=0.933
11. Assuming that

6. Assuming that

Page 169

98.000=0.933×10.000×3.807 (2×9.81×∆h)
∆h=0.388m

7. The afflux

Page 170

Fig. 4.40 Example 4.2: (a) plan of channel and crossing; (b) details of channel cross -section; (c)
details of central pier.

6. From equation 3.1, the opening ratio M=72.800/98.030=0.743.
7. From Example 3.2, a1 is 1.51. From Fig. 4.20 it is estimated that a2= 1.38.
8. From the top curve of Fig. 4.21 (wingwall abutments, b<60m) the base coefficient for a
symmetrical crossing is
=0.52.
9. The bridge is eccentric with e=Qa/Qc=9.420/15.810=0.60. This is greater than 0.20 so no
correction is needed and

10. The correction for skew is obtained from Fig. 4.23a (abutments parallel to flow). If
M=0.743 and ø=30° then

Page 171

4.40c , most of the calculations are the same as in part (a) up

Page 172

to step 11. The gross area of the opening at section 2 measured below normal depth is still
A N2=10.000×4.000=40.000m2.
11. The width of the pier when projected onto section 1 perpendicular to the direction of flow
is 1.000×cos 30°=0.866m. Thus the area of the pier below normal depth is
AP=0.866×4.000=3.464m2 . From equation 4.26, J=AP /AN2=3.464/40.000=0.087.
From Fig. 4.25a, with M =1.0 a rectangular pier with a round nose has ∆k=0.17.
Correcting for M=0.743 using Fig. 4.25b, a rectangular pier with a round nose has
σ=0.92.
Thus from equation 4.27,

Page 173

At this stage the horizontal top width of the water on the right floodplain (Fig. 3.13) is
9.441m.
The total top width of the water surface is BT=10.000+5.500+9.441 =24.941 m.
The cross -sectional areas of flow can be obtained from the simplified cross -section:
Left floodplain: A 1a=(1.960–1.500)×10.000=4.600m2
Main channel: A lb=1.960×5.500=10.780m2
Right floodplain: A1c=½×(1.960–1.500)×9.441=2.171m2
Total cross-sectional area of flow A1A=4.600+10.780+2.171= 17.551 m 2.
Thus V 1A=Q /A1A=15.000/17.551=0.855 m/s.
Usually the normal depth Froude number (FN=F 4) is calculated, but because of the
abnormal stage F1A is more appropriate. The mean depth of flow
YM1A=A1A/BT=17.551/24.941=0.704m.

There is no consideration of skew or eccentricity.
From Fig. 4.32a with M=0.690 and F1A=0.325 the value of [Y1/YN] = 1.144 so for this
example involving an abnormal stage assume that Y1 1.144Y1A=1.144×1.960=2.242m.
Thus the afflux

Page 174

Page 175

ratings. American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 109(12),
December, 1589–1602.
French, R.H. (1986) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.
Hamill, L. (1993) A guide to the hydraulic analysis of single -span arch bridges. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, 98, March, 1–11.
Husain, S.T. and Rao, G.M. (1966) Hydraulics of r iver flow under arch bridges. Irrigation and Power,
October, 441–454.
Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) (1990) HEC-2 Water Surface Profile User’s Manual, US Army
Corp of Engineers, Davis, CA.
Kaatz, K.J. and James, W.P. (1997) Analysis of alternatives for computing backwater at bridges.
American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 123(9), September, 784–
792.
Kindsvater, C.E. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Tranquil flow through open -channel constrictions.
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 955–992.
Kindsvater, C.E., Carter, R.W. and Tracy H.J. (1953) Computation of peak discharge at contractions.
Circular 284, United States Geological Survey, Washington DC.
Laursen, E.M. (1970) Bridge backwater in wide vall eys. Proceedings of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, 96 (Hy4), April, 1019 –1038.
Liu, H.K., Bradley, J.N. and Plate, E.J. (1957) Backwater effects of piers and abutments. Report no.
CER57HKL10, Colorado State University.
Matthai, H.F. (1967) Measurement of peak discharge at width contractions by indirect methods.
Techniques of Water Resource Investigations of the United States Geological Survey, Chapter A4,
Book 3, Applications of Hydraulics, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC.
Ranga Raju, K.G., Asawa, G.L., Rana, O.P.S. and Pillai, A.S.N. (1983) Rational assessment of
blockage effect in channel flow past smooth circular cylinders. Journal of Hydraulics Research,
21(4), 289–302.
Skogerboe, G.V., Barrett J.W.H., Walker, W.R. and Austin, L.H. (1973) Comparison of bridge
backwater relations. Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the
Hydraulics Division, 99 (Hy6), June, 921–938.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1954) Backwater effects of open channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, separate 415.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Backwater effects of open channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 993–1018.

