Page 251

8
How to evaluate and combat scour

8.1 Introduction

Scour can be defined simply as the excavation and removal of material from the bed and
banks of streams as a result of the erosive action of flowing water. In the context of this book,
it is assumed that this erosive action may potentially expose the foundations of a bridge.
Scour is usually considered to be a local phenomenon, but includes degradation that can cause
erosion over a considerable length of a river. Some of the observable effects of scour are
shown in Figs 8.1 and 8.2.
It is sometimes assumed that scour will be a problem only when the bed material consists
of fine cohesionless material. This is not true: ultimately the scour depth in cohesive or
cemented soils can be just as large, it merely takes longer for the scour hole to develop. For
example, under constant flow conditions, scour will reach maximum depth in sand and gravel
in a matter of hours (perhaps during one flood); in cohesive materials it will take days; in
glacial tills, sandstones and shales it will take months; in limestone years; and in dense granite
centuries (Richardson et al., 1993). However, the biggest and most frequently encountered
scour-related problems usually concern loose sediments that are easily eroded.
Scour is a very serious problem. Floods that result in scour are the principal cause of bridge
failure (Table 1.1 ). In 1973 in the USA a national study of 383 bridge failures caused by
catastrophic floods showed that around 25% involved pier damage and 72% abutment damage
(Chang, 1973). In 1985, some 73 bridges were destroyed by floods in Pennsylvania, Virginia
and West Virginia, while during the spring floods of 1987 17 bridges in New York and New
England were damaged or destroyed by scour. With about 485000 bridges spanning rivers in
the US National Bridge Inventory, it is likely that hundreds of these structures will encounter
a 1 in 100 year flood during any twelve month period, and that some will be damaged or
destroyed. On a worldwide scale the problem is even larger. Many countries have
programmes that are designed to identify the bridges that are at risk from s cour (i.e. scour
critical) with the dual aim of ensuring the safety of users and preserving the affected
structures.

Page 252

Fig. 8.1 Some observable effects of scour: (a) pier piles and pile cap exposed; (b) pier and abutment
riprap moved downstream; (c) downstrean scour hole and bank erosion; (d) downstream
scour hole arising from submergence of the opening (pressure flow); (e) slumped material
at the toe arising from failure of the riprap or bank; (f) erosion (mass wasting) and failure
of the highway embankment with flow on both sides of the abutment.

It is not just old structures, such as nineteenth century rail bridges, that are at risk; new
structures can also be susceptible if not properly designed with scour in mind. Of course, it is
easy to say that the foundations of all new structures should be made so deep as to eliminate
any potent ial problems relating to scour, just as it can be said that the bridge opening should
be made large enough to pass any flood that occurs, but in reality things are not this simple,
and economic factors must also be considered. If unnecessary expense is incurred by making
all of the foundations significantly deeper than the probable scour depth, the cumulative cost
will be very substantial because a large number of bridges are involved. In the State of
Washington, for example, environmental regulations designed to preserve the ecology of the
stream require that any construction activity that disturbs riverbed material must take place
within a watertight enclosure such

Page 253

Fig. 8.2 Bank erosion at Stoneyford Bridge, Honiton, July 1968. (Reproduced by permission of the
Environment Agency)

as a cofferdam. The cost of this enclosure varies with the plan area and the depth of
excavation, so deliberately designing very deep foundations will complicate construction and
add significantly to the cost (Copp and Johnson, 1987). On the other hand, it should be
remembered that the total cost of a failure may be of the order of two to ten times that of the
original structure, allowing for disruption to transport and commerce. Thus it is necessary to
strike a balance, setting the foundations deep enough to resist the scour that can reasonably be
expected at the site without going so deep as to incur additional unnecessary expense.
Unfortunately, when deciding just how deep is deep enough the equations that are available to
predict the depth of scour are very numerous and contradictory. In 1987, Copp and Johnson
reported that 35 different formulae for scour estimation at piers had been proposed since 1949,
almost one per year! Most of these equations were of the form

Page 254

scour hole that develops on the rising stage of a flood, or at the peak, may be filled in again on
the falling stage so that the maximum depth cannot be assessed easily after the event.
Measurement or observation during flood using divers is not safe or practical, but it is
sometimes possible to detect the maximum scour depth afterwards. For instance, if a cohesive
material is scoured and then subsequently the pit is filled with an incohesive material, by
probing it should be possible to detect the change in the strata. Similarly, with cohesionless
material it may be possible to detect changes between the fill and the underlying bed material.
New instruments are being developed to detect and monitor scour as it occurs (Fig. 8.3 and
Table 8.1 ), so better information may be available in future (Apt et al., 1992).

Fig. 8.3 The HR Wallingford ‘Tell-Tail’ scour monitoring system. One or more motion sensors are
buried at different levels within the river bed, adjacent to the structure. Under normal
conditions a buried sensor does not move, but when exposed by scour it begins to oscillate
in the flow, triggering an alarm at the surface. The system also allows a real -time
assessment of scour depth, and indicates whether scour hole refill has occurred.
(Reproduced by permission of HR Wallingford Ltd)

Table 8.1 Scour detection and monitoring equipment

Device

Brief description and limitation

Ground
penetrating radar
(GPR)

Cable and lead
Essentially for determining the profile of the bed surface in deep water
weight
post -flood. Limited, and does not indicate infilling.
Penetration testing Essentially consists of probing with a rod to find the interface between
the unsecured bed material and the infill material, which is assumed to
be of different density or resistance to penetration. Expensive and time
consuming if a large area has to be assessed.
Electromagnetic pulses (80–800 MHz) are reflected from the scour
interface. Not suitable for or limited effectiveness with highly
conductive materials such as clay, salt water, sediments saturated with
salt water, and water depths over 7.5 m. Can cover a large area quickly
with good resolution under favourable circumstances.
Tuned transducer Uses a reflected low -frequency acoustic wave (20 kHz) to locate the
scour interface, which gives better penetration but lower resolution than
high -frequency equivalents. Can cover a large area quickly with
adequate resolution under favourable circumstances.
Colour fathometer A variable -frequency acoustic wave is reflected from the scour
interface, measured in decibels, digitised, and displayed on a colour
monitor. Similar to the tuned transducer.
Uses a 200 kHz acoustic wave to obtain a plot of the channel bottom.
Very limited penetration in most conditions but is relatively simple,
quick, and can be effective, particularly if used with other methods.
Essentially as above, but cheaper versions fixed to bridge piers and
connected to datalogging or telemetry systems. Effectiveness can be
limited by debris, ice or water with entrained air.
A rod resting on the bed drops vertically as the scour hole develops,
allowing depth to be determined manually or electronically. May be
limited by length of rod and difficulty of avoiding the rod sinking into
the bed under its own weight.
Instruments may be buried where scour is expe cted and work by sensing
the channel bed-water interface by means of electrical conductance,
sliding collars, piezoelectric strips, tip switch or vibrations. Must be in
the correct place and robust enough to withstand prolonged
submergence and subsequent exposure.

Black and white
fathometer

Fixed sonic
fathometers

Sounding rods

Buried
instrumentation

Page 255

RT
or I

I

I

M
or
F

M

M

RT/I M

RT/I M

RT/I M

RT/I M

RT

RT

F

F

RT

F

Note that scour monitoring is the term for the real- time (RT) measurement of scour depth as it occurs. Scour
inspection (I) is a post-flood activity. Equipment may be mobile (M) or fixed (F). Clearly if a mobile device is
used for RT monitoring a difficulty may be getting it to the right place at the right time. The technology of these
devices is advancing rapidly so details above will change.
Based on Richardson et al. (1993)

Even if the conditions relating to the model tests are known and there are accurate field data
for comparison, there is still the difficulty of relating small-scale model results to prototype
conditions (Johnson, 1995). The only way to determine which of t he many alternative
equations is ‘the best’ is to compare the scour predictions with comprehensive field

measurements. Unfortunately, it is only recently that such data have started to become
available. In the USA over 20 states have been undertaking scour investigations (e.g. Copp
and Johnson, 1987; Tyagi, 1989; Miller et al. 1992; Bryan et al. 1995). This has resulted in a
useful and authoritative guide to evaluating scour at bridges, namely Hydraulic Engineering
Circular 18

Page 256

(HEC 18) produced by the US Federal Highways Administration/ Department of
Transportation (Richardson et al. 1993). The first edition was published in 1991; the second
in 1993 incorporated the results of further research. The UK’s guidelines appear to be largely
based on th is work (Highways Agency, 1994). Additionally, Jones (1984) and Melville (1988)
provided a good introduction to the problem of scour and the background to many of the
equations.
There are so many equations that it is not possible to present them all with a detailed
description of where they should be used, and to caution when and where the calculated depth
is likely to be exceeded. Consequently the equations in this chapter are those recommended
by Richardson et al. (1993). Some are effectively the enveloping curve to many (not all) of
the other equations, so in most situations they are conservative and tend to overestimate the
scour depth, particularly in the UK but also in the USA. Laursen (1984) remarked that if some
of them predicted the true state of a ffairs, there would be very few bridges still standing in
Arizona! However, with new bridges and where public safety is involved it can be argued that
it is preferable to design for something approaching the worst -case scenario and experience
relatively little, rather than the other way around. When assessing the potential for scour at
existing bridges the conservative nature of the equations can make it difficult to assess the
true risk. A few alternative equations are included in Appendix B, but these should be applied
cautiously with reference to the full literature because the indicated scour depth may be
exceeded. Johnson and Ayyub (1996) described how fuzzy regres sion can be used to quantify
the bias that results when laboratory-based scour models are used for field applications. For
very busy bridges engineers can select a high degree of belief as well as a high degree of
reliability and thus obtain a suitably con servative estimate of scour depth, whereas for a rural
bridge a lower reliability requirement would result in a smaller depth.
Scour can also cause problems with the hydraulic analysis of a bridge. As described in
Section 3.11, scour may considerably deepen the channel through a bridge and effectively
reduce or eliminate the backwater. Sometimes a negative backwater can be obtained, which
may be regarded as desirable, but only if the bridge and its foundations are designed to
withstand the scour depths involved. This reduction in backwater should not be relied on
because of the unpredictable nature of the processes involved.
When considering scour it is normal to distinguish between non- cohesive or cohesionless
(alluvial) sediments and cohesive material. The former are usually of most interest and will be
considered in Sections 8.2–8.6, the last describing the regime theory of alluvial channels.
Cohesive materials will be considered briefly in Section 8.7. In all cases it will be assumed
that the bridge is located on a non -tidal stream. The special case of scour in tidal areas is
considered in Section 8.8. Scour prevention measures, notably the use of riprap, are covered
in Section 8.9. Before applying any of the equa-

Page 257

tions it is essential to have an appreciation of the types of scour and the factors that influence
scour depth. These are described below.

8.2 Types of scour and its classification

So far, for simplicity, scour has been considered as a single entity. However, from the point of
view of bridge crossings it is usually classified under the headi ngs shown in Table 8.2.

8.2.1 Clear-water scour and live-bed scour

The first major division is between clear-water scour and live-bed scour. The critical issue
here is whether or not the mean velocity (V m/s) of the flow upstream of the bridge is less
than or larger than the scour-critical velocity (Vs m/s) needed to move the bed material. If
V<V S then the bed material upstream of the bridge is at rest: this is referred to as the
clearwater condition because the approach flow is clear and does not contain sediment. This
means that any bed material that is removed from a local scour hole is not replaced by
sediment being transported by the approach flow. The maximum local scour depth is achieved
when the size of the scour hole results in a local reduction in velocity and the flow can no
longer remove bed material from the scoured area.
Live-bed scour occurs where V>VS and the bed material upstream of the crossing is moving.
This means that the approach flow continuously transports sediment into a local scour hole.
By itself, a livebed in a uniform channel will not cause a scour hole; for this to be created
some additional increase in velocity is needed, such as that caused by a contraction (natural or
artificial, such as a bridge) or a local obstruction (e.g. a bridge pier). The equilibrium scour
depth is achieved when material is transported into the scour hole at the same rate at which it
is transported out.
The clear-water and live-bed conditions are significant because to some degree the growth
of the scour hole will depend upon whether or not the bed material is already in motion (Fig.
8.4). With clear -water scour the growth is slightly slower but more uniform than in live -bed
scour, which shows fluctuations (dotted line) about the equilibrium depth (solid line). The
fluctuations are due to the migration downstream of bed features such

Table 8.2 Classification of scour

Type of scour (see eqns 8.2 and 8.3 for Vs) Clear-water scour (V<V s) Live-bed scour (V>Vs)

Degradation or aggradation
Contraction scour (e.g. bridge opening)
Local scour
— piers
— abutments

Assessed over the life of the bridge—see Section 8.2.2
Eqns 8.10–8.12
Eqns 8.13 and 8.11
Eqn 8.14 and Fig. 1.15
Eqn 8.14 and Fig. 1.15
Eqn 8.17 or 8.18
Eqn 8.17 or 8.18

Page 258

as ripples and dunes (see Fig. 8.9). Note that typically the maximum local clear-water scour is
about 10% larger than the equilibrium local live -bed scour, clear water having a greater
sediment-carrying capacity. For this reason the formulae used to estimate scour depth are
classed as either clearwater or live-bed equations, and generally each group of equations
should be applied only to their respective condition. Conditions that favour clea rwater scour
are: channels with flat bed slopes during low flows; a coarse bed material that is too large to
be transported (riprap is an artificial example); channels with natural vegetation or artificial
reinforcement where velocities are only high enough to cause scour near piers and abutments;
and flow over floodplains (assuming they are grassed). To determine whether the flow
condition is clear -water or live-bed, Neill (1968) suggested that equation 8.2 be applied to the
unobstructed flow. If the average velocity (V=Q/A m/s) in the unobstructed approach section
is greater than V S (m/s) the scour will be live bed.

(8.2)

where s s is the (dimensionless) specific gravity or relative density of the sedimen t or bed
material, g is 9.81 m/s2, D50 is the median diameter (m) at which 50% of the bed material by
weight is smaller than the size denoted, and Y is the average depth (m) in the upstream
channel. Usually s s is about 2.65, so that equation 8.2 becomes

Fig. 8.4 Diagrammatic illustration of the increase in local scour depth (d SL) with time for clear -water
and live-bed conditions. The oscillations for the livebed condition (dotted) are due to
transient bed features such as ripples. The final clear-water scour depth exceeds the
equivalent equilibrium livebed depth by about 10%.

Page 259

(8.3)

At any particular location both clear -water and live-bed scour may be experienced. During a
single flood the mean velocity will increase and decrease as the discharge rises and falls, so it
is possible to have clear -water conditions initially, then a live bed, then finally clear water
again (Fig. 8.5). The maximum scour depth may occur under clear-water conditions, not at the
flood peak when live-bed scour is experienced. Similarly, relatively high velocities can be
experienced when the flow is just contained within the banks, rather than spread over the
floodplains at the peak discharge. It is also possible to have the clear-water and live-bed
conditions occurring at the same time. For example, if the floodplains are grassed or
composed of material that is larger in diameter than that in the main channel, then clearwater
conditions may occur on the floodplain with live-bed conditions in the main channel. Thus the
problem may not always be as simple or as well defined as would be convenient.

8.2.2 Degradation

The next classification in Table 8.2 is degradation, which can only occur with a live bed
(V>V S). Degradation is not the result of bridge or embankment construction. It is more widely
defined as an adjustment of the bed elevation over a large area due to changes in hydrology,
hydraulics or sediment transport. This can be illustrated by the following equation (Lane,
1955; B ryan et al. 1995):

Page 260

change to one variable on either side of the equation will affect the stability of the channel,
and can lead to degradation or aggradation (deposition of sediment). While aggradation
sounds harmless, it should be remembered that this could reduce the size of the bridge
opening and make it more likely that debris will become trapped (perhaps against the
upstream soffit), so increasing scour potential.
Urbanisation has the effec t of increasing flood magnitudes and causing hydrographs to
peak earlier, resulting in higher stream velocities and degradation. Channel improvements or
the extraction of gravel (above or below the site in question) can alter water levels, flow
velocities, bed slopes and sediment transport characteristics and consequently affect scour.
For instance, if an alluvial channel is straightened, widened or altered in any other way that
results in an increased flow -energy condition, the channel will tend back towards a lower
energy state by degrading upstream, widening and aggrading downstream. The construction
of dams stops sediment transport (QS) and results in an artificial discharge (Q) of clear water
downstream, which has a greater erosion potential. The Hoover Dam resulted in a 7.1m
degradation of the sand and gravel bed of the Colorado River, its effect extending for 111km
(Melville, 1988).
The significance of degradation scour to bridge design is that the engineer has to decide
whether the existing channel elevation is likely to be constant over the 100 year life of the
bridge, or whether it will change. If change is probable then it must be allowed for when
designing the waterway and foundations.
The lateral stability of a river channel may also affect scour depths, because movement of
the channel may result in the bridge being incorrectly positioned or aligned with respect to the
approach flow (Trent and Brown, 1984). This problem can be significant under any
circumstances but is potentially very serious in arid or semi-arid regions and with ephemeral
(intermittent) streams (Richardson et al., 1990). As an illustration, the Cimarron River in
Kansas, USA, was 15 m wide around the year 1900 but as a result of a series of major floods
in the 1930s its width increased to around 365 m, essentially occupying the entire valley
bottom. The Kosi River in India can move laterally by up to 760m per year, while parts of the
Colorado and Mississippi Rivers in the USA have rates of about 3–46m and 48–192m
respectively. Lateral migration rates are largely unpredictable: sometimes a channel that has
been stable for many years may suddenly start to move, but significant influences are floods,
bank material, vegetation of the banks and floodplains, and land use (see Fig. 1.6). In a survey
of 224 bridge sites in the USA it was found that hydraulic problems attributable to lateral
erosion by the stream occurred at 106 of them (Brice, 1984). The next largest problem was
contraction scour, which was found at 55 sites, followed by local scour, which occurred at 47.
Channel degradation was found at 34, and the accumulation of debris caused problems at 26.

Page 261

8.2.3 Contraction scour

Contraction scour occurs over a whole cross -section as a result of the increased velocities
arising from a narrowing of the channel by a constriction such as a bridge. In general, the
smaller the opening ratio (M=q/Q or b/B) the larger the waterway velocity and the greater the
potential for scour. If the flow contracts from a wide floodplain, considerable scour and bank
failure can occur. According to Blodgett (1984), during the first two or three years after the
construction of a bridge that forms a constriction bed levels may be reduced by around 0.5m
or more (‘several feet’). Relatively severe constrictions may require regular maintenance for
decades to combat erosion. Needless to say, one way to reduce contraction scour is to make
the opening wider.

8.2.4 Local scour

Local scour arises from the increased velocities and associated vortices as water accelerates
around the corners of abutments, piers and spur dykes.
The flow pattern around a cylindrical pier is shown in Fig. 8.6. The approaching flow
decelerates as it nears the cylinder, coming to rest at the centre of the pier. The resulting
stagnation pressure is highest near the water surface where the approach velocity is greatest,
and smaller lower down. The d ownward pressure gradient at the pier face directs the flow
downwards. Local pier scour begins when the downflow velocity near the stagnation point is
strong enough to overcome the resistance to motion of

Fig. 8.6 The flow pattern and scour hole at a cylindrical pier. The downflow, horseshoe vortex and
wake vortex are the principal cause of local bed erosion. (After Melville, 1988. Reproduced
by permission of Technomic Publishing Company Inc., Lancaster, PA, USA)

Page 262

the bed particles. Without a scour hole the maximum downward velocity is about 40% of the
mean approach velocity (V), the maximum strength of the downflow being recorded just
below bed level. When scour occurs the maximum downflow velocity is about 80% of V
(Copp and Johnson, 1987; Melville, 1988). The impact of the downflow on the bed is the
principal factor leading to the creation of a scour hole. As the hole grows the flow dives down
and around the pier producing a horseshoe vortex, which carries the scoured bed material
downstream. The combination of the downflow with the horseshoe vortex is the dominant
scour mechanism. As the scour hole becomes progressively deeper the downflow near the
bottom of the scour hole decreases until at some point in time equilibrium is reached and the
depth remains constant.
At the sides of the pier flow separation occurs, resulting in a wake vo rtex whose whirlpool
action sucks up sediment from the bed. As the vortices diminish and velocities reduce, the
scoured material is deposited some distance downstream of the pier.
For piers that are essentially rectangular in plan and aligned to the flow the basic scour
mechanism is similar to that just described, albeit rather more severe because of the square
corners. However, as the angle of attack to a rectangular pier increases so does its effective
width, so the scour depth increases and the point of maximum scour moves downstream of the
nose to a point on the exposed side. With a large degree of skew the maximum scour may
occur at the downstream end of the pier. If the flow direction is likely to change there is merit
in using cylindrical piers to avoid these complications.
The scour mechanism at a bridge abutment is similar to that at a pier, although the
boundary layer at the abutment or channel wall may result in an additional deceleration of the
flow compared with a central pier. The approach flow can be considered as separating into an
upper layer, which forms an upflow surface roller on hitting the abutment, and a lower layer,
which becomes the bottom or principal vortex ( Fig. 8.7). Viewed in plan, the upper layer
divides or separates, with part of the flow accelerating around the upstream corner of the
abutment into the bridge waterway while the remainder slowly rotates in an almost stationary
pool trapped against the face of the abutment and the river bank. In the bottom layer, the flow
near the bank forms an almost vertical downflow, while that nearer to the end of the abutment
accelerates down and into the waterway, forming the principal vortex. Usually scouring starts
in this region of accelerating flow and grows along the faces of the abutment. Downstream of
the abutment wake vortices form.
The basic scouring process is the same for most types of abutment, although with wingwall
and vertical wall types (as opposed to the spillthrough type in Fig. 8.7) the stagnation region
is larger, and scour is most severe near the end of the abutment where the principal vortex is
concentrated. Scour at spur dykes was considered briefly in Section 7.4.

Page 263

Fig. 8.7 The flow pattern at a spillthrough abutment. The downflow and principal vortex are the main
causes of local bed erosion. (After Melville, 1988. Reproduced by permission of
Technomic Publishing Company Inc., Lancaster, PA, USA)

8.2.5 Total scour depth, ds

Degradation, contraction and local scour are additive, but only where the scour holes overlap
(Table 8.2 ). For instance, contraction scour may have to be added to pier or abutment scour to
get the total scour depth. However, pier scour and abutment scour would not be added unless
the two scour holes overlap. This usually has to be determined by drawing a cross-section
through the waterway and superimposing the scour depths. If the holes do overlap (see
equation 8.16) the resultant scour depth is often larger than the two components, but difficult
to predict. Nevertheless, as a general reminder:

(8.5)

Some of the causes of degradation and scour are depicted in Fig. 8.8. Before considering how
to calculate scour depths it is beneficial to consider the factors that influence scour.

8.3 Factors affecting scour in cohesionless material and associated
difficulties

Table 8.3 shows the scour depths recorded in 1986 during high flows in streams in Oklahoma
(Tyagi, 1989). The table is included to give a broad indication of the range of scour depth that
may be encountered, and to indicate that the depth is not just a function of the bed material.
The large number of variables (listed below) that ideally should be included in the

Page 264

Fig. 8.8 Some typical causes of degradation and scour, (a, b) The removal of the bend (naturally or
artificially, as a channel improvement measure) leads to an increased hydraulic gradient,
higher velocities and degradation at the bridge, (c) Bank erosion and migration of the bend
results in the bridge not being properly aligned to the flow, possibly with the result shown
in Fig. 8.1f . (d) The bridge is perpendicular to the main river channel but not to the
overbank flow, resulting in a reduced hydraulic performance during floods, (e) A narrow
bridge waterway or excessive use of large stones to protect piers and abutments leads to
high velocities and downstream scour. (f) The construction of a dam retains sediment and
causes increased clearwater scour and degradation downstream at the bridge.

scour depth equations illustrates the difficulty of deriving simple but accurate formulae.
However, an understanding of the significance of these interrelated factors will help in
producing a sound estimate of scour depth.
1. Hydraulic variables including the stream discharge (Q m3/s), approach depth and mean
velocity (Ym and Vm/s), the water’s density and viscosity (p kg/m3 and v m2/s), and the
Froude number (F). These factors (in conj unc-

Table 8.3 Scour depths at some bridge sites in Oklahoma during 1986 and 1988 floods and low flows

Bridge site

River

Flow depth (m)

Scour depth (m) Channel characteristics

Page 265

Cleo Springs
Cimarron
0.61
0.18
Ringwood
Cimarron
0.23
0.23
Lacey
Cimarron
0.52
2.71
Cimarron City Cimarron
0.61
0.91
Guthrie
Cimarron
0.31
2.44
1–35
Cimarron
0.31
3.96
Cayle
Cimarron
0.31
4.88
Perkins
Cimarron
0.61
5.49
Ripley
Cimarron
4.27
3.35
Cushing
Cimarron
5.18
2.44
Oilton
Cimarron
4.57
5.18
Oilton
Cimarron
7.62
0.91
Sand Springs Arkansas
4.57
2.74
Tulsa
Arkansas
4.27
0.61
Ponca City
Arkansas
1.22
0.91
Bartlesville
Caney
1.13
0.85
Collinsville
Caney
Piers out of water 0.85
Asher
South Canadian 0.76
2.23
Calvin
South Canadian 1.16
2.71
White Field
South Canadian 1.31
2.96
Pauls Valley Washita
0.94
2.47
Davis
Washita
1.01
2.71
Gene Autry
Washita
1.12
2.80

After Tyagi (1989)

Boulders and sand

Coarse sand with
wide floodplain

Mostly fine sand to
silt

Clay sediment

Medium to fine
sand

Silt

tion with the characteristics of the bed material) determine whether clearwater or live-bed
scour will occur. With shallow flows an increase in flow depth can increase the local depth of
scour in the vicinity of piers by a factor of 2.0 or more, and for abutments by a factor of 1.1–
2.15 depending upon shape (Richardson et al., 1993). However, as the water depth increases
the scour depth becomes almost independent of flow depth. Figure 1.14 illustrates the effect
of depth on the velocity required for bed movement. Scour increases with velocity, and may
be influenced by whether the flow is subcritical or supercritical. There is relatively little
research concerning scour in supercritical flow, so this condition is often best avoided (for
several reasons).
2. The bed configuration of channels formed from sand influences scour depths.
Sediments with a diameter D>0.7mm do not form bed ripples, while those with D<0.7mm can
hav e various bed configurations: ripples, dunes, plane bed or antidunes (see Fig. 8.9). During
a flood the configuration may change within minutes with changing flow, or as a result of

other factors. Typically ripples may develop at mean flow velocities of 0.3– 0.6 m/s but are
replaced by dunes at 0.6– 0.9 m/s (Fig. 8.10). As the velocity increases

Page 266

Fig. 8.9 Illustration of different bed configurations in sand channels: (a) typical ripple pattern, F«1;
(b) dunes with ripples superposed; (c) dunes, F<1; (d) washed-out dunes; (e) plane bed,
F<1; (f) antidune standing wave, F ≈1; (g) antidune breaking wave, F»1; (h) chutes and
pools. (After Richardson et al., 1990)

further the dunes change character and offer a decreased resistance to flow (often resulting in
a stepped or discontinuous stage -discharge curve) before finally tending towards a plane bed
at velocities of around 0.9–1.5m/s. Richardson et al. (1990) quoted the following comparative
values of Manning’s n in fine ripple-forming sediments: plane bed 0.010–0.013, antidunes
with standing waves 0.010–0.015, antidunes with breaking waves 0.012 –0.020, chutes and
pools 0.018–0.035, ripples 0.018–0.028 and dunes 0.020–0.040.
3. Bed material characteristics, such as grain size distribution, grain diameter (D m),
sediment density (pS kg/m) and cohesive properties. Equations often use the median diameter
at which 50% of the material by weight is smaller than the size de noted (i.e. D50) or
sometimes the effective mean diameter (DM=1.25D50). It should be appreciated that even
determining something as simple as the D50 value may not be entirely straightforward. For
example, how is the sample to be obtained? If the material is stratified, samples of every layer
may be needed so the equations can be applied to each in turn. Bagging with a shovel is often
as good as anything,

Page 267

Fig. 8.10 Illustration of the effect of mean flow velocity and bed material particle size on the bed
configuration. (After Raudkivi, 1997; Ripples on stream bed, Journal of Hydraulic
Engineering, ASCE. Reproduced by permision of ASCE)

but some form of mechanical grab may be needed if a sample has to be obtained from the
maximum lik ely scour depth. If overbank flow occurs it may be necessary to sample both the
main channel and the floodplains. If samples are taken from within the flowing stream, then
some of the fine material may be lost. A few large boulders can be ignored, but a la rge
number mixed with mainly fine material may make it difficult to obtain a truly representative
sample.
The diameter of the bed material also affects the bed configuration and scour depth (Figs
8.9 and 8.10). Figure 8.11 shows the variation of the relative scour depth (d SP/ bp) for a
cyl indrical pier with uniform coarse non-ripple-forming and ripple-forming sediments. Under
clear -water conditions (V/VS<1) with coarse sediments the local scour depth ratio increases
rapidly to around 2.3 at the scour-critical velocity, then decreases under live-bed conditions
(V/VS>1) when there is a flow of sediment into the scour hole from upstream, and then
increases again. The dashed lines show the fluctuation in relative scour depth due to the
passage of transient bed features. The live -bed peak may be the most significant for design
purposes since the clear -water condition may not last long enough for the full scour depth to
be attained. Of course, for non -cylindrical piers and piers not aligned with the flow relative
scour depths may be very different from those illustrated.
With D50>0.7mm there is a fairly clear relationship between the relative maximum clear-
water local scour depth (dSP/bP ) and the size of the bed material relative to pier width (bP/D50),
as shown by the line in Fig. 8.12a, but when D50<0.7mm the data are scattered. Figure 8.12b
shows the data plotted to a log scale and illustrates the following relationships:

Page 268

Fig. 8.11 Diagrammatic illustration of the variation of scour depth (d SP) at a cylindrical pier (of width
bP) in a uniform sediment with velocity. Note that V/VS=1.0 is the threshold for bed
movement. (After Melville, 1988. Reproduced by permission of Technomic Publishing
Company Inc., Lancaster, PA, USA)

One of the limitations of most equations for scour depth is that they make no allowance for
the self-armouring characteristics of graded material. For instance, if the bed consists of a
mixture of sand which can be eroded and cobbles which cannot, then it is possible that once
the top layer of sand has been scoured away the bed will be covered with a layer of cobble
anchor stones and larger-diameter particles, which will ‘seal’ the bed and reduce or prevent
further erosion (Chin et al., 1994).
Figure 8.13 shows results obtained in a recirculating flume with a continual supply of
material from upstream, as may occur in a river. It appears that pier scour is significantly
reduced when non-uniform or graded materials are involved (the dashed line is for a zero
sediment supply from upstream). Thus many of the equations that assume a uniform grain
diameter overestimate the depth of scour when applied to a graded material. Based on studies
of clear -water scour depths at cylindrical piers, Ettema (1976, 1980) suggested that under
some circumstances scour depths in river gravels with σ=(D84/D16)0.5>4.0 may be only about
20% of the depths found in uniform sediments (Fig. 8.14). The diagram shows the correction
factor (Kσ) that relates scour depth in a graded material to that in a uniform sediment. This
factor has not been adequately verified

Page 269

Fig. 8.12 (a) Variation of the local clear-water pier scour depth ( dSP/bP) with the relative median bed
material diameter (bP/D50); and (b) a logarithmic plot of the data in (a). (After Copp and
Johnson, 1987. Reproduced by permission of Washington State University and Washington
State Department of Transportation)

by field measuremen ts and so is not included in the equations quoted below; if it is cautiously
adopted, it is prudent to adopt a factor of safety (Copp and Johnson, 1987; Richardson et al.,
1990). Under clear -water conditions sediment grading affects the local scour depth at
wingwall and spillthrough abutments in the same way as at circular piers.
4. Channel evolution and secondary flow features. Many alluvial channels in broad
valleys follow a cycle of degradation (down -cutting, widening, caving of the banks),
aggradation (widening, becoming shallower, deposition), and restabilisation (Bryan et al.,
1995). This may result in both

Page 270

Fig 8.13 Variation of the local pier scour depth (dSP/b P) in uniform and non -uniform sediments with
velocity expressed as a proportion of the scour-critical value (VS). The full lines are for
recirculating sediment transport; the dashed line shows the armour peak with diminishing
sediment transport. (After Melville, 1988. Reproduced by permission of Technomic
Publishing Company Inc., Lancaster, PA, USA)

the thalweg and the channel itself shifting course. In plan, the bends of m eandering ‘S-
shaped’ channels move laterally and downstream, while some bends may become cut-off.
Such changes have to be extrapolated over the life of the bridge and are often best determined
by comparing time sequential maps and aerial photographs (see Fig. 1.13).
In a braided stream that contains numerous channels the deepest scour occurs where two or
more channels converge or where the flow comes together downstream of an island or bar.
Under such circumstances the scour depth has been observed to be 1.0–2.0 times the average
flow depth (Richardson et al., 1993), or possibly even 4.0 times under some circumstances
(Melville, 1988). Similarly, at bends the velocity o n the outside of the curve can be 1.5–2.0
times the mean velocity, which increases the scour potential, as does the secondary
(transverse) flow that arises from the superelevation of the water surface and the non-uniform
velocity distribution (e.g. see Chadwick and Morfett, 1993). Brice and Blodgett (1978)
analysed 224 bridge sites in the USA where scour had occurred and attributed the hydraulic
problems at 106 of them mainly to lateral bank erosion. They

Page 271

Fig. 8.14 The effect of bed armouring, showing the variation of the coefficient Kσwith grading,
expressed as σ=(D84/D16)1/2 . Kσrelates the scour depth in a graded sediment to that in
uniform material. (After Melville, 1988. Reproduced by permission of Technomic
Publishing Company Inc., Lancaster, PA, USA)

concluded that this was the most common cause of scour. Brice (1984) found a tendency for
erosion rates to increase with the width of alluvial channels, the problem being greatest with
braided channels and least with sinuous canal forms. Johnson and Simon (1997) provided an
interesting case history, which combined modelling the stage of channel evolution with the
probability of failure of piers set at different levels in a situation where a bridge had
previously failed.
5. Changes in hydrology, hydraulics or sediment transport. Changing catchment use may
alter runoff and flood magnitudes, while channel improvements may alter flow depths and
velocities, all of which will change the depth of scour experienced at a site. This was
considered under degradation in Section 8.2.2.
6. The severity of the constriction and the length of the abutments in the direction of flow.
This can be crudely summarised as the smaller the span of the bridge (b) relative to the
channel width (B) the greater the cont raction of the flow and the greater the scour depth,
which is why many equations incorporate the opening ratio (M=b/B or q/Q). A discrepancy
arises between model results obtained with relatively uniform flow across a laboratory
channel and results obtained in the field where the flow is not uniformly distributed but often
concentrated in a main channel. Thus laboratory-based equations may overestimate scour. If
the abutment is set back from the river bank by less than 3–5 times the depth of flow through

Page 272

the bridge there is a possibility that the combination of contraction and abutment scour may
destroy the bank. Consequently the use of guidewalls or riprap protection to the bank and bed
in the vicinity of the bridge should be considered (Richardson et al., 1993).
Many laboratory- based equations were derived using a long constriction in which normal
depth was established in the contracted section (Fig. 8.15), whereas with bridges this is
usually not the ca se. This creates additional uncertainty when applying these equations.
However, generally it appears that the assumption of a long constriction produces a
conservative overestimation of the scour depth, which is usually regarded as desirable.
7. Abutment geometry. Abutments with vertical walls parallel to the flow will produce
scour depths approximately double that of spillthrough (sloping) abutments. These types of
abutment are illustrated in Fig. 4.21.
8. Pier geometry. Scour depth increases with increasing pier width ( bP). Pier shape affects
scour, square corners increasing scour depths by 10−30% (see Table 8.6 and Fig. 1.15a ) while
streamlining reduces it. Pier length may

Fig. 8.15 Definition of scour depth in a long constriction that has uniform flow in the contracted
section. The contraction scour depth is assumed to be dsc =Y2−Y1.

Page 273

significantly affect scour depths, particularly when the pier is at an angle to the flow. Some
piers that are inclined outwards towards the top by more than 20° to the vertical may increase
the scour depth by a factor of two under some conditions (Neill, 1973; Farraday and Charlton,
1983).
9. The angle of attack of the approach flow. The scour depth at piers and abutments
increases as the angle of skew increases, as shown in Figs 1.15b and 8.20. Abutment or
embankment scour is usually regarded as being reduced when embankments are angled
downstream and increased when angled upstream ( Fig. 8.21). A 45° angle downstream may
reduce the maximum scour depth by 20% whereas a 45° angle upstream may increase the
maximum depth by 10% (Ahmad, 1953). However, this effect may diminish if a flood lasts
long enough (Melville, 1988). Although it is usual to design piers and abutments so that they
point directly into the approach flow it should be remembered that the principal flow direction
during flood may differ from that during low stages, while the thalweg may shift or
meandering channels may migrate (Figs 8.8 and 8.16). Consequently, scour depths

Fig. 8.16 Halfpenny Bridge on the River Torridge at Weare Gifford, December 1979. The presence of
levees poses some questions with respect to the hydraulic analysis of the bridge. Is there a
significant flow between the levees and the outside of the floodplain, or is the water trapped
and static? What is the principal direction of the flow approaching the bridge? In this case it
looks as though it is parallel to the levees, but this could change if they were overtopped at
higher stages. There is some flow over the road embankments, so how much flow bypasses
the bridge? Note that if the road embankments were made higher to prevent bypass flow or
to keep the road open, this could make scour in the bridge waterway worse and increase the
upstream afflux. (Reproduced by permission of the Environment Agency)

Page 274

can be larger than anticipated beca use the angle of attack is greater than planned.
10. The type of flow encountered at the bridge, namely channel flow, sluice gate flow or
drowned orifice flow (see Figs 2.6 and 7.2). The last two types occur when the waterway
opening is submerged so that a pressurised flow is obtained through the bridge. Often the
vertical contraction from the soffit deflects the jet down towards the bed, increasing scour
potential. Little research has been conducted regarding scour depths under these conditions,
but it has been suggested that the calculated pier scour depth may have to be multiplied by a
coefficient ranging from 1.0 for low approach Froude numbers (F= 0.1) to 1.6 for high
approach Froude numbers (F= 0.6). If the bridge is overtopped the depth used to calculate F
should be that to the top of the bridge deck or guard rail, depending upon what causes an
obstruction to the flow (Richardson et al., 1993).
11. Ice jams may have the effect of changing abutment and pier geometry, reducing the
effective area of the waterway, and deflecting the flow downwards. This may be most
dangerous when the ice accumulation is near to the bed. Limited field measurements of scour
at ice jams have shown that scour depths of 3–6m are possible. Neill (1973) suggested that a
round-nosed, vertical or slightly raked pier is best for discouraging accumulations of drifting
ice. This is largely unpredictable and unresearched, but if ice is likely to be a problem then the
pier should be assumed to be wider than it really is at the design stage.
12. Debris trapped on the abutments and piers (Figs 1.10 and 1.11). The effect is very
similar to ice jams. To a limited extent this can be allowed for in calculations by adjusting the
shape and effective width of piers and the effective length of abutments, and by estimating the
likely decrease in waterway area (Melville and Dongol, 1992). However, this is difficult to do
with confidence.
Table 8.4 illustrates the use of some of the factors listed above, and their relative
importance, in assessing the scour potential of bridges in Tennessee (for the full methodology
and explanation see Bryan et al., 1995). Given the large number of factors that can contribute
to scour potential, it is extremely difficult to include all of them adequately in an equation to
predict the maximum scour depth. Consequently the investigation of scour has often
proceeded using dimensional analysis and simple laboratory tests that involve uniformly
graded material and known conditions. Dimensional analysis leads to a very general
functional relationship that summarises some of the factors influencing scour depth, ds:

dS=f (p, v, g, D, pS, Y, V, bP )

(8.6)

where the notation is as before; g is the acceleration due to gravity (m/s ) and ps is the density
of the sediment forming the bed (kg/m ).
With all studies of scour it is difficult to define or to observe just when incipient motion
occurs (i.e. the bed material first moves) and to relate this

Table 8.4 Mean values for the contribution of various factors to scour potential in Tennessee rivers

Page 275

Variable

Bed material
Stage of evolution of channel
Presence of bank erosion
Meander impact (on pier or
abutment, channel shifting)
High flow angle (high angle of
attack)
Bed protection (reinforcement
to bed/banks, or lack of)
Severity of channel
constriction
Channel piers (number of piers
in main channel)
Presence of skewed piers
Debris blockage
Mass wasting with pier
(erosion of banks near a pier)
Totals

Maximum
permissable
contribution

Mean value for
contribution

Mean percentage
contribution

4
4
4
3

3

3

4

2

9
4
6

1.94
1.50
1.97
0.97

0.43

1.62

0.33

0.86

0.46
0.25
0.29

18.3
14.1
18.6
9.1

4.0

15.3

3.1

8.1

4.3
2.4
2.7

46

10.62

100.0

To assess scour potential at a br idge the site is marked against the maximum permissible contribution (e.g. 1.94
out of 4 for bed material). The mean percentage contribution is the mean individual value divided by the total
score (e.g. 1.94/10.62=18.3%). The figures above are the average of the four regions used in the original study.
Obviously the percentage contribution will change from river to river and from region to region depending upon
the nature of the bed material and channel. The table is intended to show only that there are man y important
factors that must be considered when assessing scour.
After Bryan et al. (1995)

to the mean velocity (V), the significant bed velocity (U) adjacent to the material that is
available to be transported or eroded, or the shear velocity ( U*, see below). The bed velocity
is less than the mean velocity (V=Q/A ) and the surface velocity (e.g. see Fig. 2.9a). Often the
bed velocity is unknown, but it is this value that should be compared with the values in Table
1.3a , for example. Recognising this difficulty, Hjulström (1935) felt compelled to use V
(which was assumed to be about 40% greater than the bottom velocity when the depth of flow
exceeded 1 m) when he investigated the erosion, transportation and sedimentation
characteristics of uniformly graded loose particles on a smooth bed (Fig. 8.17). The diagram
shows a partial line separating sedimentation from transportation, and a broad zone in which
transportation changes to erosion. With transportation, material is moved downstream in
traction, saltation and suspension, but is generally replaced by material carried from upstream
so that the bed elevation remains constant, whereas with erosion it is assum ed that there is a
net loss of material and a reduction in bed level.
Hjulström found that 0.25mm diameter particles are the most easily eroded, starting at a
mean velocity of 0.2 m/s. For smaller particles the velocity required is higher because of the

need to overcome electrochemical cohesion, while for larger particles a higher velocity is
needed to roll or lift

Page 276

the heavier material. Figure 8.17 also incorporates the work of Shields (1936) and Sundborg
(1956). Although this (and Fig. 1.14) are useful in giving some idea of the mean velocities at
which erosion may be expected, they are not very accurate. For exampl e, there is no fixed
relationship between bed velocity and mean velocity; bed material often consists of a range of
sizes, which behave differently; the existence of sand ripples on the bed will reduce the
erosion velocity, while fine cohesive material may break away in lumps rather than being
moved grain by grain (Rice, 1977).
Frequently the significant stream velocity (U or V) is replaced with the shear velocity (U*
m/s). While U* has the dimensions of velocity, it is not a real velocity although it is related to
the real fluid velocity and to the shear stress at the bed. The shear velocity is defined as

Page 277

Obviously predicting scour depths is difficult, and there are two basic approaches. The first
is to use laboratory-based equations for scour in a long constriction, perhaps in conjunction
with a factor of safety, although this does not guarantee that either an accurate or a safe
estimate will be obtained. This approach is explored in more detail in Sections 8.4 and 8.5
below. The second option is to estimate how the natural width and depth of the channel will
be affected by the construction of a bridge. This is explored in Section 8.6, where regime
theory is considered. Under appropriate conditions this can also be used to estimate
degradation and aggradation.

8.4 Estimation of scour depth in cohesionless material

The degradation scour depth (∆d) has to be evaluated as part of the design process, but the
two types of scour that are the direct result of bridge construction are contraction and local
scour, which can occur with either clearwater or live-bed conditions, as described earlier and
summarised in Table 8.2. Each condition may have its own set of equations that should be
used to estimate the scour depth.

8.4.1 Contraction scour depth (dSC )

Contraction scour occurs as a result of the narrowing of a channel by a bridge and its highway
embankments, but this effect can be exacerbated by natural stream constrictions, islands or
sand banks, vegetation growth in the channel, debris accumulation, ice jams and bends. Bends
produce a non-uniform flow, so the contraction scour may be concentrated on the outside of
the bend, or possibly nearer the centre during flood when the thalweg may shift.
The effect of any constriction is to reduce the flow area and to increase the velocity. The
higher velocity results in an increased erosive force so that more bed material is removed
from the contracted reach than is transported into it from upstream, where there may be no
transport at all (clear -water conditions) or a lower transportation rate (live-bed conditions).
However, as the bed elevation is lowered and a scour pit develops, the cross-sectional area
increases and the velocity falls again so th at some form of equilibrium is reached. This can be
achieved either when the velocity in the contracted section falls below the critical value
required to initiate motion (clear-water scour) or when the rate of transport of material into
and out of the sco ur hole are equal (live-bed equilibrium scour).
A quick but conservative method of estimating the scour depth at a contraction of fixed
width such as a bridge is to estimate the mean flow velocity and depth in the opening (V=Q/a
and Y), and the median diameter of the bed material by weight (D50). From Fig. 1.14 the
competent mean velocity (VSC) of cohesionless material can be obtained; this is the velocity at

Page 278

which the flow is just competent to move the exposed bed material at the scoured depth. By
increasing a (via Y) the depth at which the bed material can resist being moved can be
determined, and thus the average contraction scour depth, dSC. The answer obtained is
obviously approximate, and can be seriously affected by local conditions such as eddies and
bends. For example, at a bend the scour depth may be much greater on the outside of the
curve, and this should be allowed for by adjusting either the ave rage velocity or the shape of
the scoured cross -section to obtain the maximum scour depth (see point 4 of Section 8.3).
This simple technique is likely to overestimate when the approach flow carries a large bed
load (live-bed scour). For cohesive materials compare V with the values in Table 1.3b.
At any particular location a combination of clear-water and live-bed scour may occur. A
typical example would be a bridge with several openings, some in the main channel (which
are likely to experience live -bed conditions) and one or more relief openings on the floodplain
(which is likely to be grassed and to experience clear- water conditions). Each opening must
be analysed separately using the equations, bed material and hydraulic parameters appropriate
to that particular opening. For either the clearwater or live -bed condition the equations below,
which are based on a simplified transport function, are the starting point recommended by
Richardson et al. (1993).

Clear-water contraction scour
Laursen (1963) presented the following equation for the scour-critical velocity, Vs (m/s) at
which the bed material will start to move with clear -water scour:

Page 279

bridge opening (or on the overbank), b is the bottom width (m) of the bridge opening less pier
width s (or overbank width), and DM (=1.25D50 m) is the effective mean diameter of the bed
material in the bridge opening (or on the floodplain). Note that for a single-span bridge Q2
will equal the total upstream discharge (Q1 ) unless there is flow around or over the structure
being analysed. With multispan bridges Q2 is that part of the total flow passing through the
opening under consideration. The original equations presented by Laursen used the median
diameter of the bed ma terial (D50) not DM. This modification was introduced by Richardson et
al. (1993) as a result of further research with the effect that the calculated clear-water scour
depths are reduced. With stratified material the equation would have to be applied to th e layer
with the smallest D50 to obtain the worst result, or alternatively applied to each layer in turn.
If the average depth of flow in the main approach channel prior to scour is Y1 (m), if the
head loss ( hL) is small and if the velocity heads are appr oximately equal so the water surface
through the bridge waterway is almost horizontal (Fig. 8.15), then the average depth of
contraction scour (dSC m) is

dSC=Y2−Y1

(8.11)

Of course, if the depth of flow remains constant and follows the scoured bed profile through
the contraction (Section 3.11) then this equation is not valid.
By assuming continuity between the upstream main channel (subscript 1) and the
contracted section (subscript 2) equation 8.10 can be written in terms of the approach velocity
(V 1 m/s):

(8.12)

where B is the bottom width of the upstream main channel (m) and b is the botttom width (m)
of the channel in the contracted section. Either bottom or top channel widths can be used as
long as there is consistency.

Example 8.1

When unobstructed, the discharge in a 7.5m wide channel is 6.9m 3/s when the depth is 1 .0m.
The bed material has a specific gravity of 2.65 and a D50 =0.01 m. If all of the flow has to
pass through a rectangular bridge opening with b=4.0m, calculate the scour depth.
Approach average flow velocity, V=6.91(7.5×1.0)=0.92 m/s.
From equation 8.3, the scour-critical average velocity, VS=6.36 (1.0)1/6 (0.01)1/3 =1.37 m/s.
Since V<VS the condition would be clear water so equations 8.10 and 8.11 are applicable.

The bed material in the waterway has DM=1.25D50=1.25×0.01= 0.0125m.

Page 280

Live-bed contraction scour
The following equation can be used to estimate live-bed contraction scour (Laursen, 1962):

(8.13)

where Y2, Y 1, B and b are as above, Q1 is the flow (m 3/s) transporting sediment in the upstream
main channel (i.e. floodplain flows are not included), Q2 is the discharge (m3/s) through the
contracted channel (of width b), k1 and k2 are exponents determined from Table 8.5 and Fig.
8.18 according to the mode of bed material transport, and n1 and n2 are Manning’s roughness
coefficients for the upstream main channel and the contracted section respectively (see below).
Note that in simple cases typically involving a single opening with no bypass flow Q1<Q2 as
in Example 8.2, but Q1>Q2 if some of the live-bed upstream flow passes around or over the
bridge instead of through the waterway. However, Q1<Q2 when the flow is spread out on an
upstream floodplain which experiences clear -water scour and only the live-bed discharge in
the main live-bed channel (ie Q1) is considered, as in

Table 8.5 Exponents for determining live-bed contraction scour for use with equation 8.13. Calculate

k 1

k2 Mode of bed material transport

<0.50
0.50−2.0
>2.00

0.59
0.64
0.69

0.07 Mostly contact bed material
0.21 Some suspended bed material discharge
0.37 Mostly suspended bed material discharge

is the shear velocity in the upstream section (m/s)
g=acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s)
Y 1=average depth in the upstream main channel (m)
SF1=slope of energy grade line in main approach channel (dimensionless). Usually assumed SF=SO .
w= the median fall velocity (m/s) of the bed material based on D50 (see Fig. 8.18)
After Richardson et al. (1993)

Page 281

Fig. 8.18 Variation of fall velocity (w m/s) with median particle size (D50 mm) and temperature for
use with Laursen live-bed contraction scour equation (8.13). (After Richardson et al., 1993)

Example 8.5. The openings of multiple opening contractions have to be considered
individually if the flow is not uniform, with part of the total discharge being allocated
appropriately to each opening.
Richardson et al. (1993) recommended that the ratio of Manning’s n be dropped from the
equation. They also po inted out that this equation tends to overestimate scour depth if the
bridge is located at the upstream end of a natural contraction or if the contraction is the result
of bridge abutments and piers. However, they concluded that it was the best equation
cu rrently available. As before, the average depth of contraction scour, dSC, can be obtained
from equation 8.11. An approximate general solution of the equation is shown in Fig. 8.19.
This can be useful during the early stages of bridge design, but should be confirmed by
subsequent calculations.

Example 8.2

The upstream approach channel to a bridge is rectangular in section, 20m wide, and carries a
discharge of 25.84 m 3/s when the depth of flow is 1.70m. The median particle size
D50=0.5mm (0.0005m) while the energy gradient (SF1) can be assumed equal to the bed slope
at 1 in 3000. The bridge has two 5m spans separated by a central pier. All of the approach
flow passes through the bridge openings. The water temperature is 16 °C/60 °F. Determine
the average scour depth in the waterway.

First, check that the live-bed condition exists in the upstream channel.
From equ ation 8.3 the scour-critical mean velocity is V S=6.36 Y1/6

Page 282

Page 283

Fig. 8.19 Variation of the depth of live-bed scour in a long contraction ( dSC ), expressed as a proportion
of the average depth of flow in the upstream main channel (Y1 ), with the severity of the
channel constriction (Q2 /Q1 or B/b) and (gYSO)1/2/ w as in Table 8.5. This is live -bed scour
so the flow (QFP ) on the (grassed) floodplains is ignored. Unless some flow bypasses the
bridge, for a single opening Q2 is the total flow. The solution was formulated for a
constriction that narrowed both the main channel and the floodplain. If the abutments
protrude into the main channel this is a channel constriction defined by B/b, if the main
channel is unobstructed but the floodplain is constricted by the highway embankments then
this is an overbank constriction defined by Q2 /Q1. (After Lau rsen, 1962, Scour at Bridge
Crossings, Transactions of the ASCE. Reproduced by permission of ASCE)

obtained for blunt-nosed piers, especially when at an angle to the flow (Fig. 1.15 ).
Under ‘normal’ conditions the foundations of the piers will be below bed level, but under
some circumstances the footing or pile group may be exposed, and this too has to be allowed
for when estimating scour depths. These scenarios are considered in turn below.

Clear -water and live-bed scour for conventional piers
For both clear -water and live-bed conditions Richardson et al. (1993) recommended the
Colorado State University (CSU) equation for the estimation of

equilibrium pier scour depth ( dsp m). Some alternative equations for pier scour depth are given
in Appendix B, and these may be used cautiously to obtain additional estimates. However, the
preferred CSU equation is

Page 284

(8.14)

where Y2 is the flow depth (m) at the bridge section directly upstream of the pier (m), K1P is
an adjustment factor for pier nose shape obtained from Table 8.6 for ø<5°, K2P is an
adjustment factor for the angle of attack (ø >5°) obtained from Fig. 8.20, K 3P is an adjustment
factor for bed configuration (explained below) obtained from Table 8.7, bp is the pier width
(m), V2 is the mean velocity of flow (m/s) at the bridge directly upstream of the pier, and F2 is
the Froude number=V 2/(gY2)1/2. Note that if ø>5° the factor K2P dominates so K1P can be taken
as 1.0.
With piers that comprise trestle or pile bents (Fig. 5.6) or groups of cylinders as in Table
8.6, the scour depth depends upon the column spacing. If the spacing is >5 diameters, dsp can
be limited to about 1.2 times the scour depth at a single cylinder. With columns less than 5
diameters apart the spaces between the cylinders are ignored when calculating the equivalent
pier dimensions perpendicular to the flow. For example, with three cylinders (as below) of 0.6
m diameter spaced at 2.0 m intervals, if ø=0° then bp=0.6 m and L=1.8 m. For other angles of
attack the projected width

Table 8.6 K1P—adjustment factor for pier nose shape applicable when φ<5 °

Shape of pier

Square nose

→

K1P

Table 8.7 K3P: increase in equilibrium pier scour depths for various bed conditions

Bed condition

Clear-water scour
Plane bed and antidunes
Small dunes
Medium dunes
Large dunes

Dune height, H (m)

Not applicable
Not applicable
0.6–3.0 m
3.0–9 m
>9m

Page 285

K3P

1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1–1.2
1.3

Note that these values are to be used with the CSU pier scour equation (8.14). See also Figs 8.9 and 8.10 .
After Richardson et al. (1993)

Fig. 8.20 Pier skew correction factor (K2P) for use with the CSU equation (8.14). If ø<5° the
correction for skew can be ignored. If ø>5° the skew dominates, so use the value of K2P
obtained from the diagram with K1P =1.0 regardless of shape. (After Richardson et al.,
1993)

will be between 0.6m and 1.8m. Because the angle of attack is allowed for in the projected
width, K2P is always taken as 1.0. The shape factor K1P is also taken as 1.0 regardless of the
actual column shape. The exception to this may be if debris becomes trapped between the
columns, effectively turning them into a single solid pier of width (bP) and length (L), which
can be analysed as any normal pier.
The factor K3P converts the equilibrium scour depth calculated from the CSU equation to
the maximum scour depth according to the prevailing bed configuration (Table 8.7 ). For the
plane-bed condition commonly

Page 286

encountered at bridge sites during a typical design flood, the maximum scour depth may be
10% larger than indicated by the CSU equation, so K3P =1.1. For various bed configurations
and dune heights, the table shows the factor that should be used to increase the calculated pier
scour depths (dSP). For the unusual situation where the bed exhibits large dunes during flood,
for very big rivers such as the Mississippi K3P=1.3, fall ing to 1.1–1.2 for smaller rivers. For
the antidune bed condition K3P=1.1. Note that several different bed forms may occur during
one flood as the velocities rise and fall, and that ripple-forming sediments usually have a grain
size<0.7mm, larger diameters being non-ripple forming (Figs 8.9 and 8.10).
Sometimes Kσand KFS may be added to the other correction factors in equation 8.14, where
Kσis the factor that allows for sediment grading (Fig. 8.14) and KFS is a factor of safety (Copp
and Johnson, 1987). Richardson et al. (1993) felt that the former was still not proved
satisfactorily by field data.

Example 8.3

Just upstream of a 0.9m wide round -nosed pier the depth of flow is 1.3m with a velocity of
1.6m/s. The pier is skewed to the approach flow with ø= 15°. The length of the waterway in
the direction of flow (L) is 14.4m. Assume that the channel bed is plane. Calculate the local
pier scour depth.
From Table 8.6, regardless of pier shape K1P=1.0 since ø>5°.
L/bP=14.4/0.9=16 so Fig. 8.20 gives K 2P=2.5 (using the line labelled L/b P>12 and ø=15°).
K3P=1.1 (the plane bed condition in Table 8.7).

(8.14)

As a quick check Fig. 1.15 gives an approximate dSP=1.5bp×2 .5=3.38m (where 2.5 is the
correction factor for 15° skew).

Pier scour for exposed footings
If the foundations of a bridge have been well designed with an appropriate allowance for
scour this situation should not arise. Unfortunately it does, often as a result of long-term
degradation, channel shifting, exceptionally large flows or poor design, so it is necessary to
have some means of calculating likely scour depths. It should also be pointed out that having
the foundations undermined, even if they are pi led, is not desirable because lateral support
may be lost and the piles may have to behave as columns

Page 287

subject to bending. Often the exposure of footings and the undermining of abutments is a
prelude to failure.
The effect of an exposed footing or pile cap on scour is not always easy to predict. There is
some evidence that if the top of the foundation is flush with the bed the scour may be reduced
(because part of the downflow in Fig. 8.6 is intercepted by the concrete footing). However, as
the scour holes become deeper, larger and more of the foundation becomes exposed and
projects into the flow then Richardson et al. (1993) made the following recommendation for
estimating pier scour: calculate the depth as described in case 1 and case 2 below, and then
adopt the larger of the two values.

CASE 1: TOP OF THE FOOTING OR PILE CAP IS AT OR BELOW THE RIVER BED
After allowing for degradation and contraction scou r, use the actual pier width (bP) in the pier
scour equations (as normal).

CASE 2: THE PIER FOOTING EXTENDS ABOVE THE RIVER BED
Use the width of the footing as bp in the pier scour equation, in conjunction with the average
depth and average velocity in the flow zone obstructed by the footing (YF and VF respectively)
instead of the depth and velocity of the approach flow just upstream (Y2 and V2). The value of
V F can be obtained from

(8.15)

where V F is the average velocity (m/s) in the flow zone below the top of the footing, YF is the
distance (m) from the bed to the top of the footing, and kS is the grain roughness of the bed
material, which is normally taken as the D84 value (m).

Pier scour for exposed pile groups and pile caps
The piled supports of piers and abutments may become exposed. The piles may be spaced
across the flow in addition to along it. A particular problem with this situation is that the piles
make excellent trash racks and tend to collect debris, which increases the effective size of the
group and increases scour.
If local scour has resulted in the pile group being exposed to the flow, it is not necessary to
consider the piles so the pier scour depth can be calculated using equation 8.14.
If bed degradation or contraction scour has resulted in the pile group being exposed to the
flow, a conservative analysis can be undertaken by considering them as a single width equal
to the projected width of the

Page 288

piles normal to the flow (the clear space between the piles is ignored). For example, three
0.4m piles at 2m centres at right angles to the flow would have a width bP=3×0.4=1.2m. Some
allowance for debris may be needed. If a large amount of debris accumulates then the pile
group may again be considered as a single pier using equation 8.14 (Jones, 1989; Richardson
et al., 1993). However, ignoring debris, for pile groups exposed by degradation or contraction
scour the variables for use in equation 8.14 are as follows.

b p use the total width of the piles only, as in the example in the text above
L
is defined as for a group of cylinders in Table 8.6
K 1P use a factor of 1.0 regardless of shape
K 2P if the pile group is square (e.g. 3 piles by 3 piles) then K 2P=1.0, but if the group is rectangular (e.g.
3 piles wide by 6 piles long) to determine K2P use the dimensions for a single pier of appropriate
L/bP with L and b p as defined immediately above and in Fig 8.20
K P assume a value of 1.1

If degradation or scour results in the piles, pile cap and part of the pier all being exposed to
the flow then the scour caused by each element should be calculated separately and the largest
scour depth adopted. When calculating the scour due to the pile cap assume that the cap is
resting on the bed and use the values of V F and YF as described in connection with equation
8.15.

Width of pier scour holes, WSP
The size of a scour hole can be important with respect to pier spacing and the stability of
banks and abutments. In cohesionless bed material the top width, WSP (m), of the hole
measured on one side only of a pier or footing can be estimated as

WSP=dSP (KW+cot θ)

(8.16)

where dsp is the pier scour depth (m), Kw is a coefficient representing the bottom width of the
scour hole (on one side of the pier) as a fraction of the scour depth, and θis the angle of
repose of the bed material, which is typically between 30° and 44°. For example, if the bottom
width on one side of the scour hole equals the depth of scour then Kw=1 and if the angle of
repose is 30° then WSP=2.73dsp. As a general guideline, the bottom width decreases as dsp
increases, but an assumed top width of 2.8dsp has been recommended (Richardson et al.,
1993). Thus scour from a single pier may extend over a total width of (5.6dsp+bp) measured
across the waterway op ening.

Page 289

8.4.3 Local scour depth at abutments (d SA)

The evaluation of abutment scour is more problematical than for pier scour: piers are usually
located in the centre of the channel where the flow is reasonably uniform, whereas abutments
and the associated approach embankments may cross the entire width of a floodplain from the
outside edge where the depth and velocity may be zero to a point in the main channel where
the velocity is relatively large. Thus the bridge approaches cross a compound channel of
variable topography, where the flow conditions vary greatly and the mean values are difficult
to determine accurately. This contrasts sharply with laboratory investigations that generally
have a uniform approach flow across the entire width of a rectangular channel so that the full
length of the approach embankments experiences practically the same flow. Consequently it is
not surprising that many laboratory -based equations that assume a relationship between
embankment-abutment length and scour depth overestimate significantly.
Some of the factors that influence abutment scour include the topography of the site, the
abutment shape, and the hydraulic and sediment characteristics. Scour is worst where
conditions result in the overbank flow returning suddenly to the main channel, perhaps as a
consequence of flow along the upstream face of the embankment being relatively easy, as
shown in Fig. 7.11. Vertical wall abutments have approximately twice the scour depth of
spillthrough types (see Fig. 4.21 for an illustration of the abutment types). Channel migration
may result in a larger angle of attack and scour depth than envisaged during design, while
hydraulic changes above or below the bridge may lead to channel degradation. The conditions
in the approach channel combined with the type of bed material can result in either clear-
water or live -bed scour.

Clear-water and live-bed abutment scour
Richardson et al. (1993) recommended the use of the live-bed Froehlich equation for the
calculation of both clear- water and live-bed abutment scour depths, dSA. The equation yields
large scour depths as a result of the assumption that most of the overbank flow returns to the
main channel at the end of the abutment, which is entirely feasible, particularly if the
abutments protrude into the main channel. However, if the floodplain, channel and abutments
are all covered in vegetation then smaller depths may be experienced. The predicted abutment
scour depth, dSA (m), is

Table 8.8 K1A: coefficients for abutment type

Abutment type

Vertical -wall abutment
Vertical -wall abutment with wingwalls
Spillthrough abutment

Page 290

K1A

1.00
0.82
0.55

Note that these values are to be used only with the abutment scour equations (8.17 or 8.18).
After Richardson et al. (1993)

the approach flow (see below), LA is the length (m) of the embankment-abutment projected
normal to the flow, and FM1 is the Froude number of the approach flow upstream of the
abutment. In this case FM1=VM1/ (gYM1 )1/2 where VM1 is the mean velocity (m/s) on the
floodplain, which is calculated as VMI=QA/AA where QA is the approach flow (m3/s)
obstructed by the embankment -abutment and AA (=LAYM1) is the flow area (m2) of the
approach cross -section obstructed by the embankment-abutment.
Note that with respect to the angle of the approach flow, Φ<90° if the embankment-
abutment points downstream and Φ>90° if it points upstream. For example, with a crossing
built diagonally at 45° over a floodplain then one abutment will point downstream so Φ=45°
and K2A= (45/90)0.13 =0.91, while the other abutment points upstream so Φ=135° and
K2A=(135/90)0.13=1.05. Thus scour is reduced if the embankment -abutment points
downstream and increased if it points upstream, so often only the latter needs to b e calculated,
being the worst case.
One difficulty with equation 8.17 is estimating accurately the values of the variables: depth
and velocity will vary across a floodplain and may not have been measured, so there is scope
for error. Often the conveyance or discharge over the entire floodplain will have to be
calculated as in Examples 3.2 and 3.3, or by breaking the floodplain down into subsections.
Some alternative equations for abutment scour are listed in Appendix B, and they may be
applied cautiously to obtain additional estimates of scour depth. The equation below arises
from the study of scour at the end of spur dykes, which, apart from the difference in
orientation, behave similarly to bridge approach embankments provided that (LA/YM1) >25
where LA and YM1 are defined above (Simons and Senturk, 1976; Melville, 1988; Richardson
et al., 1993). Assuming this similarity exists at the site under investigation then a rough
estimate of the abutment scour depth (dSA m) is

Page 291

Fig. 8.21 Abutment-embankment skew correction factor (K AΦ) for use with equation 8.18.
Embankments pointing downstream have Φ<90°; those pointing upstream have Φ>90°.
KAΦ represents the ratio of the depth of scour at the skewed embankment to that at a
perpenicular crossing. (After Richardson et al., 1993)

abutments for which K1A=1.0 so the term K1A/0.55 converts the values in Table 8.8 to this
scale. The adjustment factor for skew (KAΦ) can be obtained from Figure 8.21 , embankments-
abutments pointing upstream again having values of Φ>90°. Under appropriate circumstances
the equation can be used to check the results from equation 8.17, as shown later in Example
8.5.

Example 8.4

The longitudinal centreline of an embankment leading to a bridge abutment is skewed at an
angle of 30° compared with a perpendicular crossing. The length of the
embankment/abutment is 33m measured along the centreline. The abutments are of the
vertical-wall type. It is estimated that the mean depth on the upstream floodplain is 1.2m with
a mean velocity of 0.7 m/s. Calculate the maximum abutment scour depth.
The scour depth will be calculated using the recommended equation 8.17.

YM1=1.2m, VM1=0.7 m/s so FM1=0.77(9.81×1.2)1/2=0.20.

K1A=1.00 (from Table 8.8 , vertical-wall abutments).
Scour will be greatest at the abutment pointing upstream when Φ=30°+ 90°=120° (the
definition of Φis shown in Fig. 8.21, but not the value of K2A) so K2A=(120/90)0.13=1.04.

LA=33 cos 30°=28.58m (i.e. the length normal to the approach flow)

Page 292

(8.17)

8.5 Designing for scour

8.5.1 General design philosophy

The return interval of the flood used to design scour prevention measures needs to be
considered carefully. For instance, suppose that both the size of the waterway opening and the
foundations of a bridge are designed for the 1 in 100 year flood (Q100). If a discharge larger
than Q100 occurred this would not be important hydraulically if the excess flow passed safely
around or over the bridge, but it would be disastrous if the structure failed by scouring of the
foundations. Thus the consequences of the design flood being exceeded may be more severe
structurally than hydraulically.
The likelihood of the design flood being exceeded may be much higher than imagined from
a cursory inspection of the problem. This is easily calculated from the equation

Page 293

of safety should still be greater than 1.0 even with a super-flood. The super- flood should be
the 1 in 500 year event, which can be estimated as 1.7Q100 if more accurate data are not
available. If the super-flood results in water spilling over the bridge o r its approaches, as
described in Chapter 6, then it is possible that the worst-case scenario will be during a smaller
event when all of the flow is forced to pass through the waterway opening. Obviously, for less
important bridges the size of the design and super -floods may be reduced.
A failed bridge can disrupt commerce and cause loss of life (see Section 1.3), while the cost
of replacing a collapsed bridge is normally many times larger than the original construction
cost, so it is usually better value to design and construct a bridge to a standard that will
withstand scour and the super-flood rather than to have to conduct repairs and fit scour
protection measures at a later date.
When initially designing the bridge there are a number of elements or features that can be
incorporated, often at relatively little expense, that can improve the hydraulic performance
and/or reduce scour and improve structural integrity. Some of these are considered briefly
below.

8.5.2 Hydraulic considerations

The list below summarises some of the things that may be considered to help reduce scour
problems. They may not all be practical under all circumstances, nor is every possibility listed.
• Is the control of the longitudinal profile of the water surface constant (e.g. controlled by rock
outcrops) or is it likely to change (e.g. removal of old w eirs) leading to degradation or
aggradation?
• Shifting or meandering channels create uncertainty in scour prediction. Can the bridge be
located to avoid problems of this nature? Or can river training works be used effectively to
eliminate such concerns?
• Skewed crossings are not as efficient as those perpendicular to the approach flow. Scour is
increased at a skewed abutment pointing upstream. Can the bridge location or alignment be
chosen to avoid skew?
• Can contraction scour be reduced by increasing the width of the bridge opening?
• Abutment scour can be reduced by using spillthrough abutments rather than vertical-wall
types (Table 8.8 ).
• Abutment scour prot ection, such as riprap, may avoid the need to design for the full scour
depth.
• Problems may be reduced if the abutments are set back from the edge of the main channel
by 3–5 times the depth of flow, so that bank failure will not initiate abutment failure.
• Pier scour is reduced if the piers point directly into the flow (no skew).

Page 294

Is this possible? Will channel shifting alter this in the future? If it is likely that the approach
flow will change direction, can circular columns be used so the angle is unimportant?
• Pier scour increases with increasing pier thickness. How thin is it practicable to make the
piers?
• Pier scour is reduced if rectangular shapes are avoided, sharp noses being best (Table 8.6 ).
Can a more efficient shape be adopted economically?
• Can overlapping scour holes be avoided, by increasing pier spacing if necessary? When
scour holes overlap the total depth of scour increases, although by how much is not clear.
• Generally a small number of large openings is better than a large number of small openings.
• Scour problems increase where overbank flow on wide floodplains returns suddenly to the
main channel in order to pass through the bridge opening. Can guidewalls or spur dykes be
used either to return the flow more gradually or to prevent transverse flow along the
upstream face of the embankment? Can relief openings be used effectively on the
floodplains?
• Have existing bridges in the area been assessed to provide some indication of the likely
performance of the structure under consideration?
• When estimating scour depths, has adequate allowance been made for the accumulation of
debris or ice on the piers and abutments?
• Has at least 0.6m freeboard been allowed for the passage of debris between the design flood
level and the underside of the bridge deck?
• Can the underside of the bridge deck be made as smooth and streamlined as possible to
reduce the obstacle to flow if the deck becomes submerged, to reduce the vertical
contraction, and to avoid snagging debris?
• Can the danger to the bridge during a super-flood be reduced by allowing flow over the
approach embankments?
• Scour is additive, so where they overlap contraction scour (dsc), pier scour (dsp) and
abutment scour (dSA) must be added to any anticipated degradation (∆d) of the channel to
get the total depth of scour ( ds), which is dS=dSC+dSP+dSA+∆d.
• Has the proposed design significant flaws? Does it involve some uncertainty? Is there some
alternative that can be considered, perhaps using a different approach?

8.5.3 Geotechnical and structural considerations

Again, this is a brief and far from complete reminder of a few of the design factors that should
be borne in mind.
• The foundations should withstand the design flood with a factor of safety of 1.5–2.0 and the
super-flood with a factor of safety not less

Table 8.9 Some suggestions for foundations to resist scour

Foundation type

Depth and other considerations

Page 295

Spread footings on
erodable rock

Spread footing on soil The bottom of the footing should be below the total scour and degradation
depth calculated using equation 8.5.
Footings should be located on competent rock below the weathered zone and
below the maximum scour and degradation depth. Excavation and blasting
need to be conducted carefully, the excavation cleaned and completely filled
with concrete.
The bottom of the footing should bear directly on the cleaned rock surface.
Footings may be keyed to the rock by using dowels, but avoid operations such
as blasting that may damage the rock structure and aid scour.
The top of the footing or pile cap should be below the total scour and
degradation depth to minimise any possibility of being exposed, obstructing
the flow, or suffering damage.
Stub abutments in the embankment should be piled to below lowest bed level
in the bridge waterway to ensure structural integrity if the thalweg or channel
shifts course.

Spread footing on
resistant rock (e.g.
granite)
Deep foundations and
piles with footings or
caps
Stub abutments on
piles

After Richardson et al. (1993)

than 1.0. Factors of safety should reflect the importance of the crossing and the degree
of uncertainty in the design.
• The design should assume that the material down to the total scour depth has been removed
and is not available for bearing or lateral support. As a general rule, foundations should
always be at least 2 m below the level of the streambed after allowing for the total depth of
scour indicated by equation 8.5. Spread footings on soil or weathered rock should be at or
below this level (see Table 8.9 ). If used, the piling should be designed for additional lateral
restraint and column action.
• With piled foundations and a high scour potential, can the bearing load be carried by a small
number of long piles instead of a large number of relatively short ones? The obstacle to
flow is then reduced should the piles become exposed.
• When appropriate, the foundations of all piers (whether on the floodplain or main channel)
should be taken to the same depth to allow for channel shifting over the life of the bridge.
• If likely to become submerged, or if significant debris or ice forces are expected, the
superstructure should be securely anchored to the substructure. Buoyancy forces acting on
the soffit of slab or arch bridges increase the risk of structural damage (see Appendix A).
• Forces arising from scour and foundation movement are resisted better by continuous span
structures than by simple span bridges.

8.5.4 A general scour design procedure

The procedure for designing a bridge to resist scour can be broken down into the 10 steps
shown below. These are illustrated in Example 8.5.

Page 296

Step
1

Step
2

Step
3
Step
4
Step
5
Step
6
Step
7
Step
8

Step
9

Assemble the data. This should include, hydrological, climatic, hydraulic and topographic data
relating to the site, with an indication of future catchment changes; field data including samples
of the material forming the river channel and floodplains, a visual assessment of channel
stability, evidence of the behaviour of other bridges in the area and any notable features;
geotechnical data regarding depth to competent loadbearing material; the design brief, including
an indication of the importance of the crossing, the level of expenditure that can be justified, and
details of the proposed design such as the span between abutments, the number of piers and their
spacing. Determine the return interval to be adopted for the hydraulic and geotechnical design.
Analyse long- term bed and channel changes. On the basis of field observation and evidence,
local development plans, industrial developments and possibly regime theory (Section 8.6 )
assess whether or not the channel bed is likely to remain at its current level, degrade, aggrade or
shift course. Calculate the depth of degradation (∆d ) or aggradation.
Determine whether clear-water or live-bed scour is involved. Equation 8.3 can be used for this
purpose while Table 8.2 summarises the equations that can be subsequently employed.
Calculate the depth of contraction scour, dSC . Either equation 8.10 or equation 8.13 can be used
depending upon the answer from step 3.
Calculate the depth of local pier scour, dSP. Equation 8.14 is recommended. See also Appendix
B.
Calculate the width of the pier scour holes. Assume that the top width of the scour
hole=(5.6d SP+bP) and the angle of repose is 30° to the horizontal.
Calculate the depth of scour at the abutments, dSA. Equation 8.17 is recommended. Equation
8.18 and Appendix B offer alternatives.
Calculate the total scour depth, dS. This should include the estimated value for bed degradation
(if any). On a cross-section of the bridge site, plot the bridge details, the existing bed level, and
the scoured bed level and profile using the results of steps 2 and 4–7 . If the bed elevation has
been significantly reduced by scour then the enlarged channel will have lower velocities, so
equilibrium bed level may be somewhat higher than indicated; if necessary repeat the
calculations starting with an intermediate level. Concurrent with the above calculations, the
scour depths during a super-flood may be estimated to ensure integrity of the structure.
Review the analysis and evaluate the design. Have the correct equations been applied, within
range, and are the results within normal guidelines? Have all relevant factors been considered?
Glance through items 1–12 in Section 8.3 . Has appropriate engi

Page 297

neering judgement been applied? Is the design adequate? Glance down the checklists in Sections
8.5.2 and 8.5.3. Is it necessary to adjust the bridge span, pier or abutment type, width, spacing or
orientation, or to provide river training works or riprap protection (Section 8.9 )? Could it be
done better or more cheaply some other way?
Design the foundations. The design flood should be used with a suitable factor of safety, and
foundations set below the maximum scour depth (see Table 8.9 ). The calculations should be
repeated for a super -flood.

Step
10

Example 8.5

This example is Intended to illustrate the hydraulic aspects of the above procedure. For
simplicity and brevity it is concerned mainly with the underlying principles and consequently
lacks the scale and complexity that would be encountered in a real investigation.

The brief
A river in the lower stages of its course passes through a wide shallow valley (Fig. 8.22).
The main channel is 60m wide and has low banks about 1.0m high that are rather prone to
erosion, making the flow direction rather variable. The approach bed slope is 1 in 1000. The
floodplains are grassed and used for grazing. The riverbed and floodplains comprise fine
material with D50=1.0mm. Rock can be found approximately 25m below bed level. It is
proposed that a road will cross the valley requiring a bridge, basic details of which are shown
in Fig. 8.23. The proposed bridge waterway consists of a 60 m wide main channel section,
with a raised overbank section 20m wide. The latter is at current bank level and is provided
partly to enable the landowner to move livestock from one side of the highway to the other
during n ormal flow conditions. The bridge deck will be supported on three 1.2m thick round-
nosed piers at 20m centres. The proposed abutments are of the vertical type with wingwalls.
The intention is that both the piers and abutments will be perpendicular to the flow, their
length in the direction of flow being 36m. The bridge is still at the design stage, and
modifications are permissible.
In this region the most severe floods occur in winter, and it is estimated that the 1 in 100
year flood is 490 m 3/s. The discharge through the main subsections of the approach channel
and bridge waterway is indicated on the two diagrams. It is anticipated that parts of the
catchment will become more urbanised in future (hence the road).

Step 1 Assemble the data
The data availa ble are indicated above and in Figs 8.22 and 8.23. It would be advantageous
at a later date to split the channel into a larger number of subsections (perhaps 10–20
streamtubes with an equal discharge) to get a

Page 298

Fig. 8.22 Cross-section of the approach channel for Example 8.5.

Fig. 8.23 Cross-section through the bridge waterway for Example 8.5.

more detailed picture of the flow patterns, and to have more data regarding the longitudinal
profile.

Step 2 Analyse long-term bed and channel changes
The fact that urbanisation is expected locally may result in channel improvements,
increased runoff, peakier hydrographs than at present, and an enhanced sediment transport
capability. Consequently channel degradation may occur, so 0.5 m will be assigned to ∆d.
There is evidence of channel meandering, so although the intention is to construct the crossing
at right angles to the river, a skew of 15° will be allowed initially in case this condition is not
met exactly.

Step 3 Determine whether clear-water or live-bed scour is involved
From equation 8.3, the scour-critical mean velocity is

Page 299

Approach channel

Y=YM=A/BT (m)

VS (m/s)

Actual V=Q/A (m/s)

Left floodplain
Main channel
Right overbank
Right floodplain

0.80
2.60
1.60
0.80

0.61
0.75
0.69
0.61

0.61
1.95
1.25
0.61

Thus the floodplains are borderline between the two conditions, but since they are grassed,
clear -water scour is most likely. The main channel is livebed scour (V>V s). Although the right
overbank area is also grassed this relatively narrow strip will probably be quite heavily
trafficked and worn near the bridge; it will contain sediment that can be transported because
of its proximity to the main channel, the possibility of bank caving and its relatively high
velocity, so it will be considered as live bed.

Step 4 Calculate the depth of contraction scour, dsc
Two areas need to be assessed: the main channel and the right overbank. This is the live -
bed condition so equation 8.13 is applicable without the roughness ratio.

MAIN CHANNEL
Y1=depth in main approach channel=2.6m.
Q1=the flow carrying sediment in the main part of the approach channel= 304 m3/s (Fig.
8.22).
Q2=the flow passing through the main part of the bridge opening= 399 m3/s (Fig. 8.23).
B=width of main approach channel=60m.
b=net width of main bridge opening=57m (i .e. 60m less 2.5×1.2m pier widths).
From Table 8.5, with SF=SO the shear velocity

Page 300

RIGHT OVERBANK
Y1=depth on overbank at upstream section=1.6m (Fig. 8.22).
Q1=the flow in the overbank part of the approach channel=40 m 3/s.
Q2=the flow passing through the overbank part of the bridge opening= 91m3/s (Fig. 8.23).
B=width of the overbank section in approach channel=20m.
b=net width of the overbank opening=19.4m (i.e. 20m less 0.5×1.2m pier width).
From Table 8.5, shear velocity

In this case L/bP=36/1.2=30 so use the maximum ratio of 12 giving K2P=2.5.
K3P=1.1 for the plane bed condition (Table 8.7)

Page 301

(8.14)

This scour depth is unacceptably large. Inspection of the above equation shows tha t this is
mainly due to K2P=2.5, which was used to allow for some meandering of the approach
channel. An alternative is to use river training works in the approach to the bridge to ensure
that ø=0° (as stated in the brief) so that K1P=1.0 (Table 8.6 , round-nosed piers) and K2P=1.0
(Fig 8.20). Now: dSP=2.0×2.4×1.0×1.0×1.1×(1.2/2.4)0.65×(0.60)0.43=2.70m (below the main
channel).
This depth of scour will be assumed for all piers in the main channel; even if there is an
identifiable thalweg it may shift, so design for the maximum depth of scour over the whole
width. See also Example B1 in Appendix B , where some alternative pier scour equations are
applied to this problem.

RIGHT OVERBANK
Y2=1.4m upstream of the pier at the bridge cross-section (Fig. 8.23).

As above, assume a 0° (=ø) angle of approach, so K1P=1.0 for round-nosed piers, K2P=1.0
and K3P=1.1 for the plane bed condition.

(8.14)

Thus the depth of scour is 2.66m below overbank level, or 1.66m below main channel
level. It would be more sensible to adopt the pier scour depth (2.70 m) and level from the
adjacent main channel. Note that dsp/bp =2.70/1.2=2.25, which is consistent with the values
normally expected for round-nosed piers aligned to the flow. The high velocity and Froude
number in the overbank waterway may suggest that an additional overbank span should be
considered.

Step 6 Calculate the width of the pier scour holes, WSP
For both the main channel and the overbank the width of the scour holes on one side of a
pier can be obtained from WSP=2.8dSP=2.8×2.70=7.56m. Thus the total width of the top of the
hole=2WSP+bP=2×7.56+1.20 =16.32m.
The scour holes do not overlap since the piers are at 20 m centres. When drawing the hole
this corresponds to an angle of repose of about 30° to the horizontal.

Page 302

Step 7 Calculate the depth of scour at the abutments, dSA
This must be done for the left and right abutments located at the left edge of the main channel
and right overbank respectively. Equation 8.17 will be adopted initially. This essentially
considers the flow on the upstream floodplain that is cut off by hte abutment, and utilises the
mean depth and Froude number.

very different, whereas in reality the depth and velocity are likely to vary more gradually.

Page 303

RIGHT ABUTMENT
The average depth on the upstream floodplain YM1=A 1/B T1 where A1=½ ×1.6×160=128m2 and
B T1=160m giving YM1=128/160=0.8m.
From Fig. 8.22 the flow cut off by the abutment is 78 m3/s, so VM1 =78/128 =0.61 m/s.

K1A=0.55 from Table 8.8 with a spillthrough abutment.
K2A=1.0 (i.e assuming that the abutments are now at right angles to the flow).

Note that the scour depth would be 6.57m with vertical abutments and wingwalls instead of
the spillthrough type now assumed.
A second estimate of scour depth can be obtained from equation 8.18, since
LA/YM1=160m/0.8m > 25. At the end of the abutment in the main channel YA2=1.40m,
V A2=3.35 m/s, F A2=3.357(9.81×1.40)1/2=0.90, so for spillthrough abutments:

(8.18)

The depth of 4.67m will be adopted, but the abutments will be given scour protection so
that these values become overly conservative (see Example

Step 8 Calculate the total scour depth, d S
According to the brief, rock occurs 25 m below bed level, so there appears to be nothing to
stop the full calculated scour depths occurring. A summary of the scour depths relative to the
bottom of the main channel or the right overbank is:

Scour type

Left abument (m) Central piers (m) Right overbank abuments (m)

Degradation
Live-bed contraction
Live-bed pier
Live-bed abuments

0.50
0.79
Not applicable
4.45

0.50
0.79
2.70
Not applicable

Not applicable
1.70
Not applicable
4.67

These scour depths cannot be added numerically because it is not clear where the scour
holes overlap. Instead the depths must be drawn on a cross -section of the bridge and channel
as shown in Fig. 8.24.

Page 304

Fig. 8.24 Plot of the scoured prism using the result from Example 8.5.

Step 9 Review the analysis and evaluate the design
The scour depths are large, causing an increase in bridge waterway area that may result in the
velocity of flow being less than assumed, and thus reduced scour. As a quick check, Fig. 1.14
suggests that with D=1mm and an average depth of flow of 5m the competent velocity is
about 1.4m/s, so if the discharge through the main opening is Q=399m3 /s then a=399/1.14=
285m 2 giving Y=285/57=5.0m and dS=5.0−2.4=2.6m. This is similar to the scour level shown
in Fig. 8.24, but the calculations should be repeated starting with an intermediate bed level to
check this. Otherwise the appropriate equations have been used within range, but it would be
prefable to have more detailed information regarding the longitudinal water profile and the
conveyance of the various parts of the main channel and floodplains. The current lack of
detail leads to some uncertainty. The repeat calculations should also take into consideration
the revised opening geometry following the decision to use spillthrough abutments. An
alternative method of analysis based on regime theory can be found in section 8.6.
A brief review of the design is:
• abutments—spillthrough type required with riprap protection;
• piers—round nosed;
• angle of attack—assumed to be zero so river training works are needed;
• river training works—possibly riprap revetments or gabions, to be designed;
• scour—posssible down to 94.3m elevation;
• foundations—set below 92m elevation.
It would be better if the left abutment was set back from the main channel so there was less
risk of bank failure initiating failure of the abutment. This is probably desirable even if river
training works are used to ensure that the

Page 305

approach flow is perpendicular to the crossing. Velocities and Froude numbers are relatively
high in the right overbank area. Possibly a relief opening on the right floodplain should be
investigated (see also Example 1.1 ).

Step 10 Design the foundations
In general terms it looks as though all foundations should be set below a level of 92m
following the general guidelines in Table 8.9.

8.6 Regime theory

Regime theory concerns the concept that the long -term width, depth and gradient of an
alluvial channel carrying a certain amount of si lt are dictated by nature and can be
approximated by equations. The regime equations were developed mainly on the Indian
subcontinent in the first half of the twentieth century from observation and experience arising
from the design of irrigation systems (Kennedy, 1895; Lacey, 1929–30, 1933–34, 1939). It
took many years for empirical equations of this form to gain acceptance and for a theoretical
basis to be developed. Utilising data from a large number of canals Lacey summarised the
relationships as

V=0.625 (f SR)1/2

P=4.84Q1/2

where f s=(2500D)1/2

(8.20)

(8.21)

(8.22)

(8.23)

and V is the mean flow velocity (Q/A m/s), Q is the discharge (m3 /s), A is the cross-section
area of flow (m2 ), R is the hydraulic radius (A/P m), P is the wetted perimeter (m), SO is the
dimensionless channel slope, and f S is a silt factor for a sediment of diameter D (m). In wide
rectangular channels the width B (m) can be approximated by P and obtained from equation
8.21.
Numerous other equations have been proposed, notably by Blench (1939), who introduced
seperate factors for the channel bed and sides, but care must be taken when using them
because they apply only to a particular type of material (e.g. sand bed, gravel bed, cohesive
bed) or to a restricted range of discharge, sediment size, median bed material diameter (D50),
bank vegetation and channel slope. The equations can be applied successfully to channels
with similar characteristics, but when applied to channels with significantly different features
the result can be disastrous (Brandon, 1987). Another complication is that canals, which

formed the basis of regime theory, essentially carry a relatively steady discharge and sediment
load whereas rivers do not. This leads to the concept of a single

Page 306

‘dominant discharge’ which would result in the same channel dimensions as a range of flows.
The dominant discharge usually coincides with flow at, or about, the bankfull stage.
Because of the possibility of using the regime equations outside their recommended range,
they will not be listed here. A useful guide to regime equations and their use to design stable
channels was provided by Brandon (1987). Ackers (1992) gave the 1992 Lacey Memorial
Lecture, which provided a good summary of the historical development of canal and river
regime theory.
Although the equations in Section 8.4 normally provide a better approach, regime theory
can be used to obtain an indication of the scour depth at a bridge. This involves calculating
the stable regime width and depth of an alluvial channel (BR and Rs ) for a articular discharge
(Q), and then adjusting the depth to take into account the effect of the bridge contraction. The
depth of contraction scour (dsc) is obtained from the difference in the depths of flow (Novak et
al., 1996).
The minimum stable regime width of an alluvial channel is

B R=4.75Q1/2

(8.24)

where B R is the channel regime width (m) measured along the water surface at 90° to the
banks, and Q is the maximum flood discharge (m /s). If f is taken as the average of the Lacey
silt factor=1.59

width of the bridge opening. The expression used is very similar to equation 8.13 for live-bed
contraction scour with Q1=Q2 and the Manning roughness ratio omitted. Thus the normal
scoured depth of flow YSN (m) in the bridge opening is

Page 307

Page 308

8.7 Scour in cohesive materials

Relatively little research has been conducted relating to scour depths when the bed material is
cohesive. However, the fact that a cohesive materi al is likely to be more scour resistant (than
a cohesionless one) does not necessarily mean that the depth will be less, only that the scour
hole will take longer to reach its full depth. The collapse of the Schoharie Creek bridge in the
USA was the result of local scour accumulated over a 10 year period, the bed material being
glacial till (Lagasse et al., 1995). Sometimes a few large floods, not 10 years, may be
sufficient to cause significant scour.
Some theoretical approaches to sediment transport and erosion involve considering the
forces on individual particles exposed to the flow as incipient motion occurs. This concept
does not apply to a cohesive material such as glacial till. Saturated cohesive materials may
tend to break away in unpredictable lum ps, rather than a particle at a time. Nevertheless, in
the absence of any special equations for scour depth in cohesive materials the only options are
either to use the equations above for cohesionless materials, or to use the competent mean
velocity as a guide to the size of waterway required for the bed material not to be eroded (see
Table 1.3b , Example 1.1 and Section 8.4.1).

8.8 Scour in tidal waterways

The tidal cycle with its associated flow reversal can increase degradation, contraction and
local scour compared with the equivalent non -tidal crossing depending upon the amount of
sediment transported in the flow and where and when scour occurs. The introduction of
salinity, saline wedges, storm tides, reversible flow and unsteady conditions makes the tidal
situation more complex than its riverine counterpart, and as yet there are no proven scour
depth equations specifically for tidal waterways (Fig. 8.25). Additionally there are very few
measurements of scour at tidal bridges to prove or disprove the various equations.
Consequently the riverine equations described above are usually considered to be the best
available option for evaluating tidal scour (Richardson et al., 1993). It has been speculated
that future research may show these equations to be too conservative or safe (Sheppard, 1993),
but this is usually regarded as the lesser of two evils.
In all tidal or non -tidal streams the basic concept of continuity of sediment transport applies
so that for the reach under consideration during a given period of time,

V SE−VSL=∆V S

(8.30)

where V SE is the volume of sediment entering (m3), VSL is the volume of sediment leaving
(m 3), and ∆V S is the change in the volume of sediment stored in the bed (m3). In the normal
riverine environment the sediment enters and

Page 309

Fig. 8.25 Laira rail bridge over the River Plym, Plymouth: an example of a tidal crossing.

leaves in the downstream direction borne by the river flow, whereas with a tidal situation the
river is carrying sediment downstream while the flood tide is carrying sediment upstream,
some of which may be derived from littoral drift along the coastline. Thus the tidal situation is
more complex. However, the scour may again be classified as clear-water (V<V S) or live-bed
(V>V S) depending upon whether or not bed material is being transported into the bridge reach.
If live-bed material is carried into the scour hole then the depth will be less than with the
equivalent clear -water condition.
One of the first steps when planning a tidal crossing is to assess how much the tidal process
affects the conditions at the site and whether the river is tidally affected or tidally controlled.
The magnitude of the tidal influence depends upon the distance from the sea, bed slope,
channel rou ghness, cross-sectional area and tidal volume. For example, at the tidal limit, river
flow conditions predominate. Just downstream of the tidal limit (A in Fig. 8.26a ) the bridge is
tidally affected, but the tidal influence will be small. As the distance from the tidal limit
increases and the sea gets nearer (B) both river flow and tidal fluctuations become important:
the tides provide a cyclic variation in the control ling downstream water level and thus
influence the depth, velocity, discharge and direction of flow at the bridge. Eventually a point
(C) is reached at which the tidal influence will be sufficient at high tide to reduce the
discharge through the bridge to zero, with river flow being stored upstream. This is the
limiting case, and between this point and the sea bridges are classed as tidally controlled.
They will experience flow in two directions (freshwater downstream and the tide in both
directions), with the discharge and velocity being higher on the ebb as the stored river water is
discharged.

Page 310

Fig. 8.26 The three types of tidal inlet defined by Neill (1973): (a) an unconstricted inlet; (b) a
constricted inlet consisting of a narrow inlet or ‘neck’ leading to a larger inland tidal basin;
(c) offshore islands separated by tidal passages and linked to the mainland by causeways,
which experience tidal flow in two directions simultaneously. Often tidal passages can be
completely closed by a causeway since there is no absolute necessity for water to flow
through them.

The maximum tidal discharge (QMT) usually occurs near the midpoint of the tidal cycle, the
maximum and minimum tidal levels be ing associated with slack (still) water at the turn of the
tide (Fig. 8.27). Note that the bed level in the estuary may be above or below the low water
level shown in the

Page 311

diagram, so the depth measured from the mean water (sea) level has to be calculated
accordingly. Needless to say, the design of a tidal crossing is greatly facilitated if
measurements of depth and velocity at the location have been recorded over several tidal
cycles, especially spring tides when the range is largest. Storm tides, which arise from the
combination of normal astronomical tides with storm surges resulting from wind and
barometric pressure effects, may be much higher than normal tides and may have a much
different tidal period.
If the tidal influence is small or insignificant then tidally affected bridges can be designed
using the riverine procedures described previously, typically using the 1 in 100 and 1 in 500
year flood (Q100 and Q500). If the tidal influence is larger, but the greatest risk to the bridge is
still river floods, then again the riverine procedures can be used. If the greatest risk to the
bridge is from a combination of river flooding and tide and storm surges, or from the latter
alone, then the bridge must be designed using the procedures for a tidal crossing, possibly
using the 1 in 100 and 1 in 500 year storm surge with a full consideration of all the coastal
engineering processes (e.g. resonance, wind and wave effects). When the river flood
discharge is relatively small and arises from the same storm that created the tidal surge then
the river and tidal discharges can be added, or the runoff hydrograph volume can be added to
the tidal volume. If the river flood and tidal surge might result from different storms a joint
probability approach may be used to determine the Q100 and Q500 flows. If it is not clear what
presents the greatest risk, both the riverine and tidal approach should be used and the largest
scour depth adopted. Obviously the return

Fig. 8.27 The tidal cycle. Note that the tidal amplitude (H) varies significantly depending upon
whether the tides are neap, high water springs, etc. Similarly the normal semidiurnal
astronomical tidal period, T, is 12 hours 24 minutes but this may be significantly different
in some parts of the world or during a severe storm surge. Starting at the mean water level
the tidal height (h) above mean water at any time (t) is h=H sin θwhere θ=360(t/T). This
represents one tidal cycle (T) as 360°. Values below the axis are negative. The discharge at
any time (t) is Qt=QMT co s θ where θ = 360(t/T): the maximum tidal discharge (QMT ) occurs
at the midpoint of the tidal range; the mean discharge QMEAN=2QMT/π.

Page 312

interval employed for design purposes varies with the importance of the crossing.
The main differences between scour in rivers (as considered previously) and scour in tidal
waterways are described briefly below.
• The flow in a tidal stream can be in two directions: that is, freshwater flow downriver with
the tidal flow changing direction periodically.
• The continuity equation Q=AV does not apply in the normal way because Q is not constant:
as the bed level is reduced by scour and the cross-sectional area of flow increases it is
possible that both the tidal discharge and velocity will also increase, resulting in long -term
degradation.
• The values of the variables (e.g. Q, A, V, Y) are harder to estimate in the tidal situation. It is
possible that the construction of a bridge will reduce the tidal discharge and level on the
landward side of the structu re.
• The normal semidiurnal period between successive high or low astronomical tides is about
12.4 hours, but the tidal period during a design event may be much different as a result of
storm surge, wind, river floods or the geometry of the estuary and coastline. Semidiurnal
tides generally occur at low earth latitudes with diurnal variations (T≈25 hours) becoming
increasingly dominant in higher latitudes.
• The mean maximum velocity, VMEANMAX, on the ebb (corresponding to the maximum
discharge at the midpoint of the tidal cycle, QMT) at a cross -section of a tidal inlet is usually
around l.00m/s (Bruun, 1990). Taking the hydraulic radius (R m) as being equal to the
mean depth of flow, for spring tides the values of the mean maximum velocities in tidal
inlets fall within a relatively narrow band, approximately as follows:

VMEANMAX=(R1/8−0.2) m/s for R≥5m

VMEANMAX=(R1/8−0.1) m/s for R<5m

Considering all flood, ebb and littoral drift conditions, VMEANMAX may be between 0.89
m/s and 1.08 m/s, with local values in the centre of the inlet being around 33% greater
(Neill, 1973). Over a full tidal cycle the average velocity in an inlet is typically around
0.77 m/s, being slightly lower (0.70 m/s) for semidiurnal tides and higher (0.87 m/s) for
diurnal tides (Bruun, 1990).
• The relatively small velocities in tidal inlets (compared with rivers in flood) result in smaller
Froude numbers, typically ranging up to a maximum of about 0.2.
• In addition to the usual data, for tidal scour assessments it is necessary to have a knowledge
of sediment transport on the ebb and flood tides, littoral drift, the magnitude of tidal flows
and storm surges, and the interaction between tides and river flow.

Page 313

• Because of material originating as littoral drift, tidal inlets usually have a clean sandy
bottom with an average particle diameter of around 0.1 –0.5mm, whereas rivers carrying
fine sediments often have clayey or silty bottoms (Bruun, 1990).
• Storm surges (e.g. from hurricanes) may have very high peaks and short durations (less than
24 hours) compared with riverine events of the same magnitude. Consequently, ‘steady’
conditions never really exist, so scour holes may never fully develop and scour depth
equations may no t be valid.
• The unsteady storm condition just described can result in large changes in bottom roughness
as the bedform changes, ranging from sand ripples to dunes to a flat bed.
• The deposition, consolidation and susceptibility to erosion of fine sediments are influenced
by the ions present in saline water, and will be different from those in fresh water
(Sheppard, 1993).
Guidelines for assessing scour in tidal locations are given below. They should be used in
conjunction with common sense and enginee ring judgement, as appropriate.

8.8.1 Degradation and aggradation

The tidal flow arising from the flood and ebb of normal astronomical tides will usually have
the most influence on long-term degradation (∆d) or aggradation patterns. If there is transport
of sediment on both the ebb and flood tide then there may be no net loss of bed material in the
vicinity of the bridge and no degradation. If there is a net loss of sediment in one or both
directions then there is degradation, while a net gain would be aggradation. Sometimes this
may be difficult to judge. For example, if a river flows into a wide basin (Fig. 8.26b) then
riverine sediments may be mostly deposited as sandbanks in the tranquil areas of the basin (A)
and not reach the crossing at B. This will result in clear -water scour and degradation at B
unless sea -derived sediment is transported on both the flood and ebb tides. If in doubt the
general principle outlined in equation 8.30 should be remembered. To obtain a worst -case
estimate of the degradation depth apply equation 8.10 for clear -water contraction scour to the
inlet assuming the maximum tidal discharge (QMT). Obviously the presence of solid rock
would restrict degradation and scour, so knowledge of the local geology is required.
The assessment of long -term changes to bed level is complex and must include a
consideration of current and future dredging practice, the construction of new beach groynes
or entrance breakwaters, the removal of old groynes or breakwaters, land reclamation, and
any coastal defence measures that may affect littoral drift. For example, if in Fig. 8.26b the
construction of beach groynes or a breakwater at the estuary mouth (as in diagram a) cut off
the littoral drift, the flood tide would erode the mouth

Page 314

and deposit sediment in the basin , only some of which may be carried out to sea on the ebb
tide. Thus there may be aggradation in the basin and degradation in the estuary mouth. As
degradation occurs, the enlarged cross -sectional area of flow will increase the tidal discharge
and velocity and cause further degradation.
As with any bridge, the stability of the tidal channel and its tendency to shift laterally must
be fully assessed during the early stages of design. The comparison of old and new charts,
maps and aerial photographs can be useful in this respect.

8.8.2 Contraction scour and local scour

Tidal flow also affects the depths of contraction and local scour, but in this case the largest
depths may result from storm surges and tsunamis rather than from regular astronomical tides.
Local scour may occur at either end of the piers and abutments, and may be most severe on
the landward side on the ebb and the seaward side on the flood tide.
The live-bed contraction scour formula (equation 8.13) can be applied to estuaries or inlets
that are long enough to develop fully live -bed conditions, but not to short inlets. For example,
the equation can be applied to situations such that shown in Fig. 8.26a, where B/b is the
relative width of the estuary to the total length of the bridge openings and Q2/Q1 is the ratio of
the discharge passing through the bridge to that in the upstream channel. The equation cannot
be applied successfully to short inlets similar to that in Fig. 8.26b. The clear-water equation
(8.10) could be applied, but would overestimate because there will generally be a supply of
sediment from the upstr eam river and/or the tidal flow. With either equation the assumption of
a long constriction experiencing steady uniform flow is unlikely to be met, so engineering
judgement and experience are needed when interpreting the results to avoid overestimating
scour depth.
The CSU equation (8.14) for local pier scour can be applied using the appropriate tidal
depths and velocities. The calculation of abutment scour is problematical: unless the bridge
opening is very narrow, tidal velocities are relatively low compared with those in rivers
during flood, and even lower at the banks of the estuary where the abutments are likely to be
situated. Thus it may not be necessary to calculate abutment scour, but if it is the depths
obtained may be unrealistically large since the riverine equations tend to overestimate anyway.
As in the riverine situation, riprap or some other measure can be easily adopted to limit scour
at the abutments.

8.8.3 Analysis of tidal crossings

The procedure used depends upon whether the tidal inle t is unconstricted or constricted. The
constriction may be due to either the geometry of the inlet or the bridge itself. The essential
distinction is that the tidal level in an

Page 315

unconstricted inlet is assumed to be constant so the water surface is horizontal, whereas at any
time in a constricted inlet there is a significant difference in surface water level so the surface
is not horizontal. The existence of large mudflats, thick vegetation (rushes, reeds) in the
estuary or heavily vegetated overbank areas will result in the attenuation of tidal levels and a
sloping water surface, and so should be classed as constricted for analysis purposes. Figure
8.26a shows a typical unconstricted river mouth, and Fig. 8.26b shows a typical constricted
inlet. It may not always be obvious whether an estuary is unconstricted or constricted, and it is
possible that an estuary that is unconstricted at normal tides may be considered constricted
during a 1 in 100 year or 1 in 500 year design storm surge.
Unconstricted inlets can be analysed using a procedure outlined by Neill (1973), which
a ssumes a horizontal water surface and well-defined vertical sides to the channel. Constricted
inlets can be analysed using an ‘orifice’ equation. Both cases are considered below. If it is not
clear which approach to employ, use both and adopt the largest scour depth.
Richardson et al. (1993) recommended a three-stage analysis for tidal waterways. Stage 1
includes: a qualitative assessment of the stability of the tidal inlet; an investigation of future
changes and development plans for the estuary and adjacent coastline; an evaluation of
whether scour is predominantly controlled by river flow, tidal flow or both; classification of
the estuary as constricted or unconstricted; and an assessment of whether clear-water or live-
bed scour is most likely. All of these judgements are facilitated by site visits, sonic sounding
to obtain sediment data, and the installation of equipment to record flow depths and velocities
simultaneously at different points in the estuary. Stage 2 is the quantitative evaluation of the
variables (notably discharge, velocity and water depth) that are used in the riverine scour
depth equations presented earlier. This will probably result in an overestimation of scour
depths because the assumption of steady-state equilibrium is not valid with unsteady tidal
flows. For complex problems, stage 3 involves using physical or computer models to verify
the stage 1 and 2 analysis.
The sections below are principally concerned with the stage 2 analysis.

Scour depth in an unconstricted estuary
The steps required to evaluate the bridge scour in an unconstricted estuary with a horizontal
water surface are summarised below.
1. Decide upon the location of the bridge and its preliminary design.
2. Determine the type and size of the bed material (D50) and locate any rock outcrops that will
limit scour. Many coastal inlets have sandy beds in the 0.1–0.5 mm range.
3. Assess the pattern of sediment transport, potential degradation depth and the lateral stability
of the channel.

Page 316

4. Plot a graph of the elevation of the water surface against net bridge opening area (a). This
is the total cross-sectional area of the bridge openings perpendicular to the direction of flow,
or the cross -sectional area of the estuary channel minus the area of the piers and abutments
(e.g. see Fig. 8.28).
5. For the site, determine the normal tidal range, which is the height between the mean high
and low tidal water levels (or the est uary bottom, if this is higher) as shown in Fig. 8.27.
Note that the mean sea level in Britain is often assumed to be 0.000m relative to Ordnance
Datum (m OD) at Newlyn, but it varies with location.
6. For the 1 in 100 year and 1 in 500 year design storm tide, or the return interval appropriate
to the importance of the crossing, determine the tidal range (2H m) and tidal period (T s).
These data are unlikely to have been recorded and so may have to be estimated.
7. For the the return interval adopted, use the storm tidal amplitude (H m) to plot the storm
tidal level (elevation) as a function of time from the information in Fig. 8.27 using normal
mean sea level as the datum for elevation (e.g. see Fig. 8.29). Determine the midpoint of
the tidal range, which is assumed to coincide with the maximum tidal discharge, QMT.
8. For various water surface elevations calculate the volume of water stored in the estuary or
basin upstream of the bridge. This can be obta ined from the average area enclosed by
successive contours and the contour interval. Plot a graph of water surface elevation against
storage (e.g. Fig. 8.30). From th is determine the tidal volume (VOL m 3) between the high
and low storm tide levels (or the estuary bottom, if this is higher). The tidal volume is the
amount of water (m3) that must flow past the bridge between low and high tide to fill the
estuary upstream .
9. Determine the maximum design discharge, QMAX (m3/s). Assuming a sinusoidal variation
of discharge with time as in Fig. 8.27, then according to Neill (1973) for an ideal estuary
the maximum tidal discharge (QMT m3/s) occurs at the midpoint of the tidal range when the
tidal energy gradient is steepest. With the storm tidal period (T s) defined by the plot in step
7 and with π=3.14, QMT can be estimated from the area between the sine curve and Q=0
axis as

where Q is the significant riverine contribution to flow which (as discussed earlier) may
be zero if the river flow is insignificant, the peak flood discharge if it is relatively large,
or the routed flow through a basin (Fig. 8.26b) as appropriate. Alternatively, the volume
of water under the river hydrograph can be added to VOL with Q=0 if the timing of the
events coincide.

(8.32)

10. Determine the corresponding average midtide velocity (VMT m/s) in the bridge openings
from

Page 317

Page 318

17. For important crossings, physical or computer modelling should be undertaken to verify
the analysis, particularly if the hydraulics or geometry of the site are complex or unusual.

Scour depth in a constricted estuary
Constricted estuaries are characterised by having a sloping water surface as a result of
significant tidal flow resistance, Fig. 8.26b being a possible example. It is assumed that the
maximum difference in water level (∆h m) between the sea and the inland part of the estuary
or basin occurs at the midtide level when the tidal discharge is greatest. When the constriction
is caused by the channel (not by the bridge) the velocity and discharge in the inlet channel can
be obtained from the following ‘orifice’ and continuity equations (Kreeke, 1 967; Bruun,
1990; Richardson et al, 1993):

Page 319

If the measurement of ∆h does not include riverine storm flow (Q) then, when the
circumstances warrant it, equation 8.32 can be used to obtain the maximum design discharge,
QMAX=QMT+Q.
Equation 8.33 gives the average midtide velocity in the bridge openings as VMT=QMAX/ aMT.
Again it may be prudent to increase the average value of VMT by 33% to obtain VMAX ,
although in a constricted ‘ orifice’ inlet there may be a smaller variation of transverse velocity.
Apart from the depth, hC , and the method of calculating QMAX and VMAX, most of the steps
listed for the investigation of unconstricted estuaries can be applied to constricted inlets as
well. The depth of local scour during the design storm surge can be obtained from the
appropriate riverine clear -water or live-bed equations using the values of QMAX, VMAX and hC.
The estimation of contraction scour using VMT in the riverine equations res ults in excessively
large values if the inlet is too short to be a long contraction and the storm surge is too short for
scour depths to be fully achieved. The worst -case degradation depth can be obtained from the
clear -water contraction scour equation (8.10), as described in Section 8.8.1, using the value of
∆h for normal ebb and flood tides (not a storm surge) in equation 8.34 to obtain the
corresponding values of QMT and VMT.

Example 8.7

A small tidal basin at the head of a river estuary has a similar geometry to that shown in Fig.
8.26b. The basin lies within an urban area that is to be opened up for redevelopment by
having a new river crossing constructed at the narrowest point of the channel. It is not clear
whether the estuary is unconstricted or constricted, or whether the crossing will be tidally
affected or tidally controlled. The proposed crossing point is 132m wide. The bridge will be
perpendicular to the flow with abutments on the same alignment as the existing quay walls
(i.e. they do not protrude into the channel). Thus the contraction will result from three round-
nosed piers each 4.0m wide (including some protection from impact by small craft). At the
centre of the channel the depth is about −3.9m OD. A preliminary investigation of the site has
yielded the data below.
Bed material: fine to medium sand, D50=0.2mm.
Tide heights for various return intervals: 1 in 1 year: +2.85m OD
1 in 50 years: +3.28m OD
1 in 100 years: +3.36m OD
Tidal period corresponding to the above levels=12.41 hours.
Riverflow into the basin during an observed 1 in 100 year storm=30.4 m 3/s.
Length of inlet neck LC=800m.
Manning’s n for the inlet bed=0.03s/m 1/3.
Estimated midtide difference in water level between the estuary and the inland basin during
a 1 in 100 yea r tide (but with normal river flow), ∆h= 0.31 m.
Corresponding average midtide depth in the 800m length of inlet=2.4m.

Page 320

Initial assessment
An unconstricted and constricted analysis will be undertaken since it is not clear which
procedure is the most appropriate. A return interval of 1 in 100 years will be adopted. Because
the river catchment is quite small it is possible that both the 1 in 100 year river flood and the
storm tide will be the result of the same event, so the same return interval will be used for
both. The basin is developed and its edges are bounded by well -defined quay walls, so the
lateral stability of the channel is not a problem. However, further development of the
catchment may increase river floo ds and cause degradation in future. An allowance of 1.0m
(∆d) is made for this. The D50 =0.2 mm and it is suspected that there is sediment transport in
both directions on the tide, so live-bed scour is likely.

Unconstricted estuary
The net cross-sectional area of the bridge openings (i.e. with the area of the piers
subtracted) is plotted in Fig. 8.28 as a function of water level.
Mean sea level is 0.000m OD. The normal tidal range is +2.85m OD but during the 1 in
100 year storm this increases to +3.36m OD. Thus the design storm amplitude, H, is 3.36m.
The equivalent tidal period is 12.41 hours. Assuming a sinusoidal variation the equations in
Fig. 8.27 can be used to plot the design tidal cycle as shown in Fig. 8.29. The maximum
discharge occurs at the midpoint of the tidal cycle, which is at normal mean sea level in this
instance.
The volume of water stored in the estuary is shown as a function of water level in Fig. 8.30.
This gives the tidal volum e between low and high tides (+3.36m) as VOL=3.4×10 6 m3. Using
equation 8.31:

(8.31)

Fig. 8.28 Graph of water level against the net cross -sectional area of flow in the bridge openings
perpendicular to the direction of flow (a) for Example 8.7 .

Page 321

Fig. 8.29 The storm tidal cycle calculated for Example 8.7 .

Fig. 8.30 Graph of sea level against the volume of water in the estuary. The difference between the
storage at high and low tides is the tidal volume (VOL m3 ) in Example 8.7.

The 1 in 100 year river flow is Q=30.4m3/s so from equation 8.32:

Page 322

(8.32)

From Fig. 8.28 at midtide level the net area of flow in the bridge openings aMT=295 m2.
Thus the average midtide velocity in the openings is

Assume that the maximum velocity in the centre of the channel is 33 % higher so:

(8.33)

1.00m allowance for degradation (∆d) plus 0.15m contraction scour (dsc) plus 4.37m local pier
scour (dsp). Thus considering the estuary to be unconstricted gives the future maximum scour
depth as 5.52m, so scour is possible to −9.42m OD.

Page 323

Constricted estuary
Many of the values above can be used for the constricted analysis, which is based on the head
loss as the sea floods into (or ebbs out of) the tidal basin. Equation 8.37 gives the velocity
head loss coefficient as

With VMAX=1.58 m/s and Y2 =3.90m (the known depth at the pier, as before) then
F 2=VMAV/(gY2)1/2 =1.58/(9.81×3.90)1/2=26. For round-nosed piers, no skew and a flat bed the
pier scour depth is

(8.14)

With a degradation depth of 1.0m, the total potential scour depth is 1.0+ 0.16+4.88=6.04m
(i.e. scour to −9.94m OD).
The estimates of VMT and F are lower than normally expected, probably because the basin
is at the head of the estuary. Under different circumstances the average velocity for a 1 in 100
year storm tide may be

Page 324

expected to exceed significantly the value of VMEANMAX , which is often around 1.00m/s for
normal spring tides. However, much depends upon the validity of the assumptions and data
(see Kreeke, 1967; Bruun, 1990). This inlet may be too short to meet the conditions for a long
contraction, while the value of ∆h is not easy to determine accurately, particularly in
situations where a significant and variable riverflow is also involved. The existence of
mudflats above low tide level that submerge at different times can make it difficult to define
precisely the ‘midtide level’ that corresponds to maximum discharge. Regardless of which
method is used there is a considerable scope for error when analysing tidal crossings.

8.9 Combatting scour

The best and most cost-effective way to ensure that scour is not a threat to the structural
integrity of a bridge is to design the structure so that its foundations are either well below the
scour level or sufficiently well protected (by riprap or a suitable alternative) for scour not to
be a problem. The former is the safest and most reliable method, assuming that the scour
depth and channel stability have been correctly assessed over the lifetime of the bridge,
whereas protective measures need regular monitoring and maintenance to be continually
effective. Another measure that can be adopted at the design stage is to optimise the location
an d alignment of the bridge, particularly in relation to potentially destructive flood flows. A
good hydraulic design is also required, with suitably sized waterways and efficient
streamlined piers and abutments positioned to avoid skew and eccentricity. The provision of
spur dykes, guidebanks, channel training works, channel improvements, relief openings and
allowing the overtopping of embankments have all been discussed previously.
With existing bridges that are found to be suffering from scour, if it is not possible to alter
the foundations some of the ancillary works just described can be added. Bridge piers can also
be protected by placing in front of them sacrificial piles in a V formation that points directly
into the flow (Anon, 1992). This approach h as been adopted for the Over rail viaduct on the
River Severn, England (Anon, 1994). However, one of the most common and time-honoured
methods of alleviating scour is to dump large pieces of rock (riprap) in the affected area,
usually at piers and abutments. When rock is available in a suitable size, riprap is generally
regarded as the most economical protective material. A riprap blanket has the advantage of
being flexible should settlement occur, easily repaired, easy to place, durable, and recoverable
should the stones be moved.
Riprap can be an effective scour prevention measure, but if incorrectly placed it may also
initiate scour. In either case, during a sequence of floods the large velocities and turbulence
experienced in bridge openings can move riprap, so regular monitoring is required. The
collapse of the bridge at

Page 325

Schoharie Creek in the USA in 1987, which caused the death of 10 people, started with the
removal of riprap around the bridge piers. Severe scour of the glacial till beneath the spread
footings then occurred over a 10 year period (Richardson et al., 1993; Lagasse et al., 1995).

8.9.1 Riprap at abutments and piers

There are many design guides that advise on the use of riprap (Brown and Clyde, 1989; Li et
al., 1989; Richardson et al., 1990). One recommendation is that riprap should not be used on
slopes steeper than 1 in 1.5. This simple limitation, along with using a correctly sized and
graded stone (Table 8.10 ), may eliminate many potential problems. When designing riprap at
abutments common failure modes are:
• the movement and erosion of particles as a result of high velocities and powerful vortices,
which are exacerbated if the stone size is not large enough, the gradation is too uniform or
the embankment too steep relative to the angle of repose of the riprap;
• a translational slide of the riprap down an embankment, which may be initiated by channel
scour eroding the toe of the riprap blanket, sliding along the plane of the filter blanket,
excess pore water pressure, or bank slopes that are too steep. This type of failure may be
indicated by cracks parallel to the channel in the upper part of the riprap blanket;
• a modified slump failure along an internal slip surface within the riprap, which may occur if
the slope is near the riprap’s angle of repose so that movement of individual stones results
in a slide. The causes are similar to a translational slide;
• a slump failure involving a rotational -gravitational movement along a slip surface within the
embankment material, causes being excess pore water pressure reducing friction, the use of
non-homogeneous material that results in ‘fault lines’, and slopes that are too steep.
Chiew (1995) reviewed the mechanics of riprap failure at cylindrical bridge piers, and
identified three failure modes:
• shear failure due to the stones not being large or heavy enough to withstand the downflow
and horseshoe vortex;
• winnowing failure due to the erosion of the underlying bed material through the voids or
interstices of the coarse riprap stones;
• edge failure, where the erosion of the natural bed material next to the riprap results in a
small scour hole into which the outer stones of riprap roll or slide, leading to a progressive
failure.
These problems can be avoided by making the riprap large and heavy enough to resist motion,
ensuring the thickness of the riprap layer is adequate and

Page 326

at least greater than one stone thick (this facilitates rearmouring of any scour hole and helps to
eliminate winnowing and edge failure), providing a stone or fabric filter layer to retain the bed
material, and ensuring that the riprap extends uniformly over the areas prone to scour (see
below). Thus it is important that the riprap layer is thick enough and composed of stones of
the necessary diameter and gradation to withstand the prevailing conditions. There are many
equations that can be used t o calculate the required diameter, and these share some of the
disadvantages of scour depth equations: they are either theoretical or based on small-scale
laboratory experiments, while the field data available to verify them are scarce and sometimes
of unc ertain accuracy. The factors that should be considered include the velocity to be resisted,
stone density, the shape and angularity of the rock, the depth of flow, the degree of turbulence
or eddying, the curvature of the flow, and the slope angle (Neill, 1973). Velocity-based design
procedures are thought to be as good as any, provided that an accurate estimate of the velocity
can be obtained (Richardson et al., 1990). Less scientific approaches to the problem are to use
the size of stone that has been obs erved to work under similar conditions during similar floods,
or to use a rule of thumb. Some of these are considered later.

Riprap at abutments
When deciding the stone diameter to use with a Froude number (F)≤0.80 the following
equation, based on the Isbash (1935) formula, was recommended by Pagán-Ortiz (1991, 1992)
and Richardson et al. (1993):

In both equations the factor K allows for the local increase in velocity at the point of riprap
failure. The recommended procedure for obtaining the characteristic average velocity in the
above equations is as follows.
(a) Determine the distance from the toe of the abutment to the nearest edge of the main
channel ( Fig. 8.31), which is called the set-back distance, LSB.

Page 327

Fig. 8.31 Riprap protection and zones of failure at setback abutments. The cross-hatched area shows
where the riprap is most likely to fail. Without the riprap protection the channel bed is most
vulnerable to scour at the upstream corner of the abutment as shown in Fig. 8.7, the scoured
zone extending into the waterway (perpendicular to the flow direction) by a distance of
2.75d SA where dSA is the abutment scour depth. See also Fig. 8.35. (After Richardson et al.,
1993)

Page 328

(b) Calculate the average depth of flow in the main channel, YAV .
(c) Calculate the set -back ratio (SBR)=LSB/YAV.
(d) If SBR<5 for both abutments then V=Q/a where Q is the total upstream flow but excluding
any that overtops the roadway, and a is the total area of the bridge openings.
(e) If SBR>5 for an abutment then V=Q/A for the overbank flow at that abutment. This
effectively assumes an imaginary wall along the edge of the main channel so that all of the
flow on that floodplain (Q) passes through the corresponding overbank area of the bridge
opening (A).
(f) If SBR<5 for one abutment but>5 for the other then the velocity for the former obtained
from point (d) may be too low so the average velocity for this abutment should be based on
the area (A) between the abutment and an imaginary wall on the opposite bank. The
corresponding discharge (Q) is all of the flow between the outer edge of the floodplain
associated with the abutment and the imaginary wall on the opposite bank.
The area of the riprap protection required is illus trated in Fig. 8.31, and should extend
outwards to a distance twice the depth of flow on the overbank area (2 YOB ) up to a maximum
of 7.6m. This area should include th e abutment slopes. With spillthrough abutments the zone
where initial failure of the riprap usually occurs is on the overbank near the downstream toe
(shown cross-hatched in the diagram). It then expands outwards to include the toe of the
abutment slope, which can endanger the abutment, as described above. Another vulnerable
zone is at the upstream corner of the abutment. With vertical-wall abutments the initial failure
zone usually occurs in the bed at the upstream corner, where the flow accelerates as it enters
the waterway opening (Fig. 8.7). The zone then spreads into the opening (Richardson et al.,
1990; Pagán -Ortiz, 1991, 1992).
The minimum thickness of the ripra p layer should be the larger of D100 or 1.5D50. This
thickness should be increased by at least 50% if the riprap is placed underwater or in less than
ideal conditions. Some guides (Li et al., 1989) suggest that the thickness need not exceed
2D100. Thickness is

Table 8.10 Typical riprap grading and classification (all values in metres)

% passing

Particle size

100–90 2.0 D50
85–70 1.5 D50
50–30 1.0 D50
15–5 0.67 D50
5–0 0.33 D50

0.15

0.300
0.225
0.150
0.100
0.050

0.20

0.400
0.300
0.200
0.125
0.075

D50 size (m)
0.45
0.60

0.900
0.675
0.450
0.300
0.150

1.200
0.900
0.600
0.400
0.200

0.30

0.600
0.450
0.300
0.200
0.100

0.75

1.500
1.125
0.750
0.500
0.250

0.90

1.800
1.350
0.900
0.600
0.300

After Li et al. (1989); Richardson et al. (1990)

Page 329

measured perpendicular to a sloping surface. The need for a filter layer or fabric to support
and reinforce the riprap and separate it from the bed material should also be considered
(Section 8.9.2). There is a large body of trade literature that can help the designer in this
regard.

Riprap at piers
Planning to use riprap at piers is to some extent tantamount to accepting that the basic design
is inadequate. At best riprap is a temporary means to alleviate pier scour problems. The large
velocities and strong vortices near piers make regular inspection of the riprap essential when
it is used (for this reason the riprap should never be buried). The stone diameter requ ired in
fresh water is (Brown and Clyde, 1989; Pagán-Ortiz, 1991, 1992; Richardson et al., 1993)

(8.41)

where Q and A are the discharge and area of the main channel, C=0.9 for a pier near the bank
in a straight uniform reach, while C=1.7 for a pier in the fastest part of the flow around a bend.
Intermediate values of C are used in between these two extremes.
The riprap protection should be flush with the river bed and extend horizontally over a
distance of 2 bP to 3bP from all faces of the pier, where bP is the width of the pier normal to the
flow. The greater the penetration of the riprap into the bed the less likely it is to be moved, but
the minimum thickness should be 3D50. The largest rock size used should not exceed 2D50. In
some situations a stone or fabric filter may be needed (see below).

Highway embankments and streambanks
If riprap is placed on a steepl y sloping surface it is easier for flowing water to roll or slide the
stones down the slope. Consequently a larger diameter (heavier) stone may be needed on
sloping revetments, abutments, spurs and embankments. A theoretical treatment of riprap
stability on slopes was given by Brown and Clyde (1989), Li et al., (1989) and Richardson et
al.,

Page 330

(1990), while Figs 8.32 and 8.33 provide a simple and interesting comparison of the diameters
required on flat and sloping surfaces which are parallel to the flow. The charts may be used to
design riprap protection to highway embankments or eroding stream banks. The trial and error
procedure is as follows.
1. Estimate the mean flow velocity (V m/s) and guess the 50% stone size, D50 (m).
2. If the depth of flow Y<3 m calculate D50/Y or if Y>3 m calculate D50/(0.4×Y).
3. Enter Fig. 8.32 with the value from step 2 and obtain the corresponding value of VIMP/V ,
which is the ratio of the velocity impacting on the stone ( VIMP m/s) to the mean flow
velocity (V m/s).
4. Calculate VIMP=(VIMP/V)×V. If the flow hits the riprap perpendicularly the velocity, V IMP,
should be increased by a factor between 1.0 and 2.0. A factor of 2.0 may be prudent to
allow for future changes in stream alignment.
5. Enter Fig. 8.33 with the adjusted value of V IMP and read off the stone size/weight needed
for the embankment slope in question. This chart assumes a spherical stone of density 2650
kg/m 3 (i.e. specific gravity= 2.65).

Fig. 8.32 Velocity against riprap stone (V IMP) on the channel bottom, for use with Fig. 8.33 . (After
HEC 11, Brown and Clyde, 1967)

Page 331

Fig. 8.33 Approximate size of riprap (D50 or W50) required to resist displacement as a function of
impact velocity against the stone (VIMP m/s) and the embankment slope. (After HEC 11,
Brown and Clyde, 1967)

6. If the diameter of stone obtained from step 5 is not the same as assumed in step 1 then
repeat the procedure until it is.
Remember that slopes steeper than 1 in 1.5 are not recommended and that if significant
drawdown of the water surface occurs or if there is a change in flow direction around the
co rner of an abutment the results must be used cautiously and/or the stone size increased.

Page 332

Alternative approaches
Different equations will give different diameters of riprap, assuming that the velocity and
depth are known—which may not be the case, so it is important that common sense and
experience are also employed. Existing bridges in the region may provide a guide as to what
works in practice. Rules of thumb can serve as a means of learning from the experience of
others , provided individual judgement is also applied. Paraphrasing Neill (1973) quoting
Blench (1969), a rough guide is:
• large sand bed rivers without a very large bed load—normally need stone about 68 kg;
• small sand bed rivers—stone as small as 23 kg may suffice;
• gravel bed river with a small bed load and moderate attack—twice the diameter of the
largest material that rolls on the bed;
• gravel bed river with a very violent attack (as at the nose of a spur)—three times the
diameter of the largest material that rolls on the bed.
Frequently, trade literature can provide a means of obtaining ‘second opinions’ or useful
design suggestions. For channel beds (not specifically in the vicinity of piers or abutments)
Fig. 8.34 shows a graph for the determination of stable riprap diameter or weight. Although
very simplistic it can serve as a handy guide; note that it gives the D40 or W40 size, which will
be smaller than the D50 or W50 (for a typical riprap, very approximately D40≈0.8D50).
Assuming spherical particles of density 2650kg/m3 the conversion from diameter (D m) to
weight (W kg) is

W=0.524D3×2650=1388D3

(8.42)

When using Fig. 8.34, to ensure that adequate protection is afforded and to avoid winnowing,
the velocity of water in the voids (V V m/s) of the riprap layer should be calculated . For a
uniformly graded material of diameter, D, this is given by (Stephenson, 1979)

Page 333

Fig. 8.34 Approximate riprap stone weight and diameter required for various velocities. Use the
maximum line for very turbulent flows and the minimum line for normal flows.
(Reproduced by permission of US Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station)

Example 8.8

For the crossing in Example 8.5, determine the riprap requirements at the abutments.
The design in Example 8.5 was left incomplete in that the calculations were not repeated
after the decision was made to change to spillthrough abutments, but as a preliminary estimate
of the riprap requirements assume that the conditions in the contracted section are as shown in
Fig. 8.23.

Left abutment/main channel
In the main channel Y2=2.4m, V2 =2.92m/s, F2=0.60.
Note that in this case the SBR=0 and 8.3 for the left and right abutments respectively so
either from case (d) V2=399/(2.4×57)=2.92 m/s or from (f) and Fig 8.22
V 2=(68+304)/(2.4×57)=2.72 m/s. The higher value will be adopted.
Using equation 8.38 for F<0.80, with spillthrough abutments K=0.89 and sS=2.65, then

(8.38)

Use a 0.45m class riprap as in Table 8.10. The area covered should extend 4.8m (2Y) from
the abutment as in Fig. 8.31. The minimum thickness should be D100 to 2D100, say 1.8m (the
same as below).

Page 334

Right overbank area
On the overbank Y2=1.40m, V2 =3.35m/s, F2=0.90 so use equation 8.39 for F>0.80.
Say LSB=20m and in the main channel YAV=2.40m so SBR=20/2.40=8.3 >5.
Thus V should be calculated from all of the overbank flow at that abutment, which (from
Fig. 8.22) is Q=(40+78)=118 m3/s. Thus V= Q/A=118/(1.40×19.4)=4.35 m/s.
With spillthrough abutments K=0.61 and ss=2.65 then

Use a 0.6m class riprap ( Table 8.10). The area of protection required is as shown in Fig.
8.31 and should extend outwards from the abutment to a distance of twice t he depth on the
overbank area, that is 2×1.4=2.80m (it may be sensible to make it 4.8m, the same as at the
other abutment). The minimum thickness of the layer should be about D100 to 2D100, say 1.8m.

Piers
Riprap should not be needed at the piers of an appropriately designed new bridge but, as an
illustration, for the main channel Y2=2.4m and V 2= 2.92 m/s (from Fig. 8.23). Assume
s s=2.65, for a round-nosed pier K=1.5, and that the piers are in a straight where the flow is
fastest so C=1.2. From equation 8.41 V=1.2×2.92=3.50m/s.

(8.40)

Use a 0.60m class riprap as in Table 8.10. The riprap should extend a distance of
2bP=2×1.2=2.4 m from the pier. The minimum thickness is 3D50=3×0.60=1.80m with the
surface of the riprap at bed level.
As a quick check, using the same velocity as above, V=3.50 m/s and assuming very
turbulent flow around the pier so that the maximum curve applies, the chart in Fig. 8.34 gives
W40=200kg and D40=0.52m (so very approximately if D40=0.8D50 then D50=1.25×0.52=0.65m,
similar to above). Check the void velocity using equation 8.44:

Since 0.12 m/s is less than 0.6 m/s (the value for sand with D=1 mm in Table 1.3a), this is
acceptable.

Page 335

8.9.2 Riprap specification

The required properties of riprap are that it is hard, durable, dense and angular. The rock must
be able to withstand abrasion, freeze -thaw action, weathering, and dissolution. Typically,
igneous and metamorphic rock is used, although some sedimentary rocks may be suitable. A
relatively high density is desirable because it increases the weight of a rock of any given size,
so the current is less likely to move it. Angular riprap is preferred to rounded stones because it
interlocks better, but it also has a higher angle of repo se, which increases stability. The angle
of repose of very angular material is fairly constant at around 40° regardless of size, whereas
with very rounded material large diameters may have an angle of repose of 40° but it falls off
to about 33° below 0.15m diameter. As explained in Section 8.9.1, on sloping surfaces a low
angle of repose can initiate failure of the riprap blanket. However, not more than 25% of the
stones should have a length 2.5 times their breadth. Very flat, slab -like stones are easily
dislodged by the flow. The use of broken concrete riprap was not recommended by
Richardson et al. (1990).
Riprap should be a graded material that comprises a range of sizes rather than being
entirely composed of stones with the same (D50) diameter. The different-sized stones interlock
and prevent flow through the void spaces. Typical grading classifications are shown in Table
8.10. Generally the grading is not critical: usually a tolerance is specified and any material
that falls in this band is acceptable. The availability and cost of stone in a particular location
must always be borne in mind.
Riprap can be placed by hand, or by backhoe, skip, bucket or dragline. Some sources say
that hand placing is better than machine placing, but others say it is worse than tamped,
machine-placed riprap. In most cases hand placing is too expensive anyway. If a backhoe,
skip or bucket is used the objective should be to place the stone as near as possible to its final
position and rework it as little as possible. Excessive re -handling or dragging tends to break
the stone and cause segregation. For this reason it should not be tipped down an embankment
or pushed down by bulldozer.
The riprap at the toe of a bank is particularly vulnerable to scour, and any loss of material
can initiate sliding or failure of the entire blanket. Generally a toe trench, taken well below
normal bed level along the whole length of the riprap blanket, is filled with riprap to anchor
the toe and support the upslope material (Fig. 8.35a ). If a trench is not possible the toe may be
anchored by placing a deep, narrow strip of riprap on the bed (shown dashed), but this has its
drawbacks: if badly done it can channel flow along the base of the slope and cause scour.
With both of these desig ns the objective is to form a reserve of riprap in the most vulnerable
area, so when scour occurs the riprap falls into the scour hole and armours it. The quantity of
riprap required in the reserve is 1.5 times the volume calculated assuming the design blanket
thickness at a slope of 1 in 2 over the

anticipated scour depth (Brown and Clyde, 1989). Care must also be taken at the interface
between the start/end of the riprap protected area and the natural channel.
Riprap is not usually placed directly on the base (the bed or side-slope of the channel) but
on a filter layer, which is designed to prevent base material leaching through the riprap. Thus
the filter material must be relatively fine

Page 336

Fig. 8.35 Some typical bank protection measures: (a) bank protection only using riprap, with extra
material at the toe, which can be launched into the toe scour hole when erosion occurs
(after Brown and Clyde, 1989); (b) gabion and mattress protection with a moderate
embankment slope, and (c) a steep slope; (d) bank protection using a tubular geotextile
gabion taken to below bed scour level, (b–d after Netlon Ltd, reproduced with permission)

Page 337

to prevent winnowing of the bed but more permeable than the bed material, the choice being
between a gravel or synthetic fabric filter.
Very fine base material may requ ire a gravel filter which consists of several layers, each
around 0.1 –0.2 m thick and meeting the stability and permeability requirements of the layer
underneath, otherwise one layer will usually suffice. A filter ratio of 5 or less between layers
usually results in a stable condition, where the filter ratio is defined as the ratio of the 15%
particle size (D15) of the coarser layer to the 85% particle size (D85) of the finer layer (Brown
and Clyde, 1989; Richardson et al., 1990). An additional requirement is that the ratio of the
D15 of the coarser layer to the D15 of the finer layer should exceed 5 but be less than 40. Thus:

(8.45)

Page 338

An alternative to the traditional gravel filter is a filter cloth, which is quick and easy to
install, economical, and not reliant upon the availability of suitable stone. However,
placement underwater is not easy, the in-situ performance of such filters over the lifetime of a
bridge is unproven, and they may initiate sliding or slump failure of the riprap on steep slopes.
Often fabrics with an open area of about 25–30% are selected, their function being to provide
both f iltration and drainage. If not well designed and specified with respect to piping
resistance, clogging resistance, strength and installation procedure the performance may be
unsatisfactory. A 100–150 mm protective layer of sand or gravel may be spread on the cloth
to prevent puncturing and local stretching when using large riprap, but heavy rock must still
be placed carefully. The sides and toe of the cloth must be sealed or embedded in a trench to
prevent leaching of the base material at the edges. Similarly, care must be taken at the joins,
which are usually sewn or overlapped. Folds should be included to allow stretching under
settlement.

8.9.3 Summary of some protective measures for bridges and riverbanks

Below is a brief reminder of some of the options available when trying to decide how to
combat scour. Obviously which is adopted depends upon a combination of many factors.
Generally rock riprap, rock or timber groynes, jacks and vegetation are at the cheaper end of
the spectrum, while cellular block revetments, concrete mattresses and concrete walls are
more expensive (Petersen, 1986; Richardson et al., 1990).
• Riprap, as described above.
• A paved invert through the bridge opening (Highways Agency, 1994). This must extend a
sufficient distance up and downstream of the structure, and must be toed in to the river bed
(by about 1.5m in the UK) to prevent undermining by scour. Note that a smooth surface to
the paving may increase velocities and cause scour downstream.
• Soil-cement mixtures using in situ soil might be an alternative to riprap if rock is scarce, but
they have many disadvantages.
• Gabions: stone in wire baskets. Hand filling can be expensive.
• Tubular gabions: a geotextile tube mechanically filled with stone.
• Grass or woody vegetation (possibly in combination with a geotextile) can be used to
reinforce embankments naturally (see Hemphill and Bramley, 1989; Coppin and Richards,
1990). This may include the use of fascines (typically living willow poles that grow,
providing bank stabilisation) and buried thorn or willow faggots (bundles of branches),
which are used as reinforcement to weak soils.
• Sand -cement -filled sacks; commonly used for emergency repairs.
• Precast cellular concrete blocks; used as a facing material.

Page 339

• Concrete (reinforced) if frequent impact by ice flows or logs or other floating debris is
expected.
• Geotextile mattresses for covering larger areas: a stone blanket wrapped in a geotextile.
• Articulated concrete mattresses; difficult to place and expensive.
• Timber or concrete cribs: large open ‘cubes’ formed from timber or concrete members,
which are filled with rock or earth. Used for bulkheads or retaining walls, perhaps to hold a
highway embankment . An alternative to a reinforced concrete retaining wall.
• Drop structures: concrete or gabion structures that are used to reduce and stabilise the slope
of a channel. They can take the form of either a weir or a straight drop (step) without the
structure projecting above the upstream bed level. Both usually have a protective
downstream apron to prevent erosion near the drop.
• Groynes (or spurs); used to stabilise a channel, reposition the flow or encourage siltation
(Section 7.6.1).
• Jetties (USA) consisting of triangular steel frames (jacks) tied together into units. By
collecting debris they increase the roughness of parts of the channel or floodplain and help
train the stream (like groynes). They also reduce velocities and erosion near the banks.
• Spur dykes (guide banks); used where large overbank flows have to return to the main
channel (Section 7.4 ).
For bank protection Hemphill and Bramley (1989) quoted a typical cost per metre (1978 –85
prices) of £1 for seeded grass, £9–18 for geotextiles, £13 for thorn faggots, £19 for geotextile-
reinforced vegetation, £25 for ungrouted riprap, £85 for concrete-filled bags, £87 for gabions,
£116 for interlocking concrete blocks (ungrouted), £130 for steel sheet piling, £291 for
concretefilled mattress, and £347 for in -situ concrete wall.

References

Ackers, P. (1992) Gerald Lacey M emorial Lecture. Canal and river regime in theory and practice:
1929–92. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Water Maritime and Energy, 96,
September, 167–178.
Ahmad, M. (1953) Experiments on design and behaviour of spur dikes, in Proceedings of the
International Association of Hydraulic Research, American Society of Civil Engineers Joint
Meeting , University of Minnesota, August 1953.
Anon (1992) Sacrificial action may counter pier pressure. Construction Weekly, 26 February, 14–15.
Anon (1994) Rail rethink leaves research in limbo. New Civil Engineer, 24 February, 8.
Apt, S.R., Richardson, J.R., Hogan, S.A., Van Zanten, B.L. and Siller, T.J. (1992) Laboratory testing
of scour-monitoring devices, in Transportation Research Record 1350, Hyd rology and Bridge
Scour, Transportation Research Board/ National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 19–27.

Page 340

Blench, T. (1939) A new theory of turbulent flow of liquids of small viscosity. journal of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Paper 5185.
Blench, T. (1969) Mobile -Bed Fluviology, University of Alberta Press, Edmonton.
Blodgett, J.C. (1984) Effect of bridge piers on streamflow and channel geometry, in Transportation
Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research
Board/National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 172–183.
Brandon, T.W. (ed.) (1987) River Engineering—Part 1, Design Principles, Institution of Water and
Environmental Management, London.
Brice, J.C. (1984) Assessment of channel stability at bridge sites, in Transportation Research Record
950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National
Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 163 –171.
Brice, J.C. and Blodgett, J.C. (1978) Countermeasures for Hydraulic Problems at Bridges. Vol. 1,
Analysis and Measurement, report FHWA-RD-78–162; Vol. 2, Case Histories for Sites 1–283,
report FHWA -RD -78–163. Federal Highways Administration, US Dept of Transportation.
Brown, S.A. and Clyde, E.S. (1989) De sign of riprap revetment. Report no FHWA-IP -39–016,
Hydraulic Engineering Circular 11 (HEC 11). Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Bruun, P. (1990) Port Engineering, 4th edn, Vol. 2, Harbor Transportation, Fishing Ports, Sediment
Transport, Geomorphology, Inlets and Dredging; Chapter 9, Tidal inlets on alluvial shores, Gulf
Publishing Company, Houston, TX.
Bryan, B.A., Simon, A., Outlaw, G.S. and Thomas, R. (1995) Methods for assessing the channel
conditions related to scour -critical conditions at bridges in Tennessee. Final Report Project No. TN-
RES1012, United States Geological Survey, Nashville.
Chadwick, A. and Morfett, J. (1993) Hydraulics in Civil and Environmental Engineering, 2nd edn, E
& FN Spon, London.
Chang, F.F.M. (1973) A statistical summary of the cause and cost of bridge failures. Federal Highway
Administration, US Department of Transportation, Washington DC.
Chiew, Y.-M. (1995) Mechanics of riprap failure at bridge piers. American Society of Civil Engineers,
Journal of the Hydraulics Division, 121(9), September, 635–643.
Chin, C.O., Melville, B.W. and Raudkivi, A.J. (1994). Streambed armoring. American Society of Civil
Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 120(8), August, 899–918.
Copp, H.D. and Johnson, J.P. (1987) Riv erbed scour at bridge piers. Final Report WA-RD 118.1,
Washington State Department of Transportation, Olympia, WA.
Coppin, N.J. and Richards, I.G. (1990) Use of Vegetation in Engineering, CIRIA/Butterworths,
London.
Ettema, R. (1976) Influence of bed gra dation on local scour. Report no. 124, University of Auckland
School of Engineering.
Ettema, R. (1980) Scour at bridge piers. Report no. 216, University of Auckland School of
Engineering.
Farraday, R.V. and Charlton, F.G. (1983) Hydraulic Factors in Bridge Design, Hydraulics Research
Station, Wallingford, England.
Hemphill, R.W. and Bramley, M.E. (1989) Protection of River and Canal Banks, CIRIA/Butterworths,
London.

Page 341

Henderson, F.M. (1966) Open Channel Flow, Macmillan, New York.
Highways Agency (1994) Design Manual for Road Bridges, Vol. 1, Section 3, Part 6, BA 59/94, The
Design of Highway Bridges for Hydraulic Action. HMSO, London.
Hjulström, F. (1935) The morphological activity of rivers as illustrated by river Fyris. Bulletin of the
Geological Institute of Uppsala, Vol. 25, Chap III.
Isbash, S.V. (1935) Construction of dams and other structures by dumping stones into flowing water.
Trans. Res. Inst. Hydrot. Leningrad, 17, 12–66.
Johnson, P.A. (1995) Comparison of pier scour equations using field data. American Society of Civil
Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 121(8), August, 626–629.
Johnson, P.A. and Ayyub, B.M. (1996) Modeling uncertainty in predictions of pier scour. American
Society of Civil Engineers , Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 122 (2), February, 66–72.
Johnson, P.A. and Simon, A. (1997) Effect of channel adjustment processes on reliability of bridge
foundations. American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 123 (7), July,
648–651.
Jones, J.S. (1984) Comparison of prediction equations for bridge pier and abutment scour, in
Transportation Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2,
Transportation Research Board/National Research Council, Washingto n DC, pp. 202–209.
Jones, J.S. (1989) Laboratory studies of the effects of footings and pile groups on bridge pier scour.
US Interagency Sedimentation Committee Bridge Scour Symposium, US Department of
Transportation, Washington DC.
Kennedy, R.G. (1895) The prevention of silting in irrigation canals. Proceedings of the Institution of
Civil Engineers, 119, 281–290.
Kreeke, J. van de. (1967) Water -level fluctuations and flow in tidal inlets. Proceedings of the
American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the Waterways and Harbors Division, 93 (WW4),
November, 97–106.
Lacey, G. (1929–30) Stable channels in alluvium. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,
229, 258–384.
Lacey, G. (1933–34) Uniform flow in alluvial rivers and canals. Proceeding of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, 237, 421–453.
Lacey, G. (1939) Regime flow in incoherent alluvium. Central Board of Irrigation and Power, India,
Publication 20, July.
Lagasse, P.P., Thompson, P.L. and Sabol, S.A. (1995) Guarding against scour. Civil Engineering, 65
(6), June, 56–59.
Lane, E.W. (1955) The importance of fluvial morphology in hydraulic engineering. American Society
of Civil Engineers Proceedings, 81 (795), 1–17.
Laursen, E.M. (1962) Scour at bridge crossings. Transactions of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, 127, Part 1, 166–180.
Laursen, E.M. (1963) An analysis of relief bridge scour. American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal
of the Hydraulics Division, 89 (HY3), 93–118.
Laursen, E.M. (1984) Assessing vulnerability of bridges to floods, in Transportation Research Record
950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National
Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 222 –229.
Li, R.M., MacArthur, R. and Cotton, G. (1989) Sizing riprap for the protection of approach
embankments and spur dikes and limiting the depth of scour at bridge

Page 342

piers and abutments, Vol. 2, Design Procedure. Report no. FHWA-AZ89–260, Arizona Department
of Transportation, Phoenix.
Melville , B.W. (1988) Scour at bridge sites, in Civil Enginering Practice, 2/Hydraulics/Mechanics
(eds P.N.Cheremisinoff, N.P.Cheremisinoff and S.L. Cheng), Technomic Publishing Company,
Lancaster, PA, pp. 327–362.
Melville, B.W. and Dongol, D.M. (1992) Bridge pi er scour with debris accumulation. American
Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 118 (9), September, 1306–1310.
Miller, A.C., Johnson, D. and Steinhart, R. (1992) Predictive equations for bridge scour applicable to
streams in Pennsylvania, Field Manual, Research Project 89 –03. Environmental Resources
Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University.
Neill, C.R. (1968) Note on initial movement of coarse uniform bed material. Journal of Hydraulics
Research, 17(2), 247–249.
Neill, C.R. (ed.) (1973) Guide to Bridge Hydraulics, Roads and Transportation Association of
Canada/University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Netlon Ltd. Maritime and Waterway Engineering with Tensar and Netlon Geogrids, Blackburn,
England.
Novak, P., Moffat, A.I.B., Nalluri, C, and Narayanan, R. (1996) Hydraulic Structures, 2nd edn, Unwin
Hyman, London.
Pagán-Ortiz, J.E. (1991) Stability of rock riprap for protection at the toe of abutments located at the
floodplain. Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Pagán-Ortiz, J.E. (1992) Stability of rock riprap for protection at toe of abutments and floodplain.
Transportation Research Record 1350, Transportation Research Board, Washington DC, 3 –6.
Petersen, M.S. (1986) River Engineering, Prentice-Hall, Englewoo d Cliffs, NJ.
Raudkivi, A.J. (1997) Ripples on stream beds. American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of
Hydraulic Engineering, 123(1), January, 58–64.
Rice, R.J. (1977) Fundamentals of Geomorphology, Longman, London.
Richardson, E.V., Simons, D.B. and Julien, P.Y. (1990) Highways in the river environment. Report no.
FHWA -HI-90–016, National Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Richardson, E.V., Harrison, L.J., Richardson, J.R. and Davis, S.R. (1993) Evaluating Scour at Bridges
2nd edn. Publication no. FHWA -IP-90–017, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 18, National
Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration (FHWA), McLean, VA.
Sheppard, D.M. (1993) Bridge scour in tidal waters. Transportation Research Record 1420,
Transportation Research Board, Washington DC, pp. 1–5.
Shields, A. (1936) Anwendung der ähnlichkeitsmechanic und turbulenzforschung auf die
geschiebebewegung. Mitteil, PVWES, Berlin, no. 26.
Simons, D.B. and Senturk, F. (1976) Sediment Transport Technology, Water Resources Publication,
Fort Collins, CO.
Stephenson, D. (1979) Rockfill in Hydraulic Engineering, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Sundborg, A. (1956) The river Klaralven: a study of fluvial processes. Geogr. Annlr., 38, 125–316.
Trent, R.E. and Brown, S.A. (1984) An overview of factors affecting river stability, in Transportation
Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference,

Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 156–163.
Tyagi, A.K. (1989) Scour around bridge piers in Oklahoma streams. Final Summary Report, No. 89 –1.
Oklahoma State University, Still water.

Page 343

