Page 189

6
How to analyse flow over embankments

6.1 Introduction

McKay (1970) described a location in Australia where an embankment had to be constructed
across an 8 km (5 mile) wide floodplain, which sometimes carried enormous flows. In such
cases it is often impractical to build an embankment that is higher than the flood level and
uneconomic to provide as many waterway openings as might be desired purely from the
hydraulic point of view. The only practicable design solution may be to allow water to pass
over the embankment (Fig. 6.1). Provided the embankments are designed not to be damaged
by overtopping and the road is not so important that it must be kept open at all costs, this
provides a pragmatic solution to a potentially dif ficult problem.
Another reason for allowing water to pass over the approach embankments may be to
prevent damage to the bridge. For example, consider a bridge with approach highway
embankments that cross a wide floodplain ( Fig. 6.2). Option A below represents a
‘conventional’ design approach, whereas option B is less conventional since it allows flow
over the embankments.
Option A is to construct a bridge with an economically sized opening that will pass a 1 in
50 year flood, and road embankments that are above the highest recorded flood (say the 1 in
200 year flood level). This is a reasonably typical design standard. If such a flood occurred
(and equation 8.19 indicates there is a 39% chance that a 1 in 200 year flood will occur in a
100 year period, which could be the life of the bridge) then the opening would have to pass a
much larger flow than it was designed for. This may cause serious damage to the bridge, or
possibly its destruction (see Table 1.1 ).
Option B is to design the opening for the 1 in 50 year flood and to keep the approach
embankments just above this level over most of their length (Fig. 6.2). If the bridge
superstructure is higher than the approaches to avoid it becoming submerged when the flow
passes over the embankments, the greatest threat to the bridge occurs near the design flood,
not the peak discharge (Richardson et al., 1993; Highways Agency, 1994). Anything larger
than the design flood passes relatively harmlessly over the embankments, avoiding damage to
the bridge.

Page 190

Fig. 6.1 Floodwater passing from right to left over the bridge approach at Chilly Bridge on the River
Exe, December 1960. Preventing this flow by raising the approach embankments would
increase the chance of the bridge being damaged and exacerbate flooding upstream. The
object at the bottom right is reputedly a garden shed, which illustrates the hazard of debris
becoming trapped in an opening. (Reproduced by permission of the Environment Agency)

Fig. 6.2 Example of a bridge and highway approach embankments crossing a wide valley.

Page 191

Option B has proved successful in many locations. Bradley (1978) quoted as an example
the Nottoway River Bridge on State Route 40 in Vir ginia. The bridge itself was designed for a
1 in 100 year flood of around 280 m3/s but actually coped with 740 m 3/s without incurring any
damage, the excess flow passing over the embankments. After the flood, only minor repairs
were required to the downstream shoulders of the embankments, a quick and cheap thing to
accomplish compared with replacing a damaged or destroyed bridge. Of course, if it is known
that overtopping of the embankment will happen, it can b e designed accordingly (CIRIA,
1987).
If high road embankments are constructed then this will result in a greater obstacle to flow,
a larger backwater and greater flooding than would occur if overtopping was allowed, as in
Fig. 6.1. Another point to keep in mind is that if a road embankment is designed that retains
more than a certain quantity of water on the upstream floodplain (25000m in the UK), then
the embankment is classed as a dam and becomes subject to dam safety legislation. This may
impose higher construction standards initially, and then regular safety inspections throughout
its life. Controlled overtopping of the embankment can avoid this problem as well.
As mentioned above, overtopping of the approach embankments can act as a ‘safety valve’
that prevents expensive damage to a bridge. This is illustrated by Fig. 6.3a. In the diagram, the
curve ABC represents the flow through the bridge opening. This reaches a maximum at B,
which is the level of the top of the embankments. From A to B all of the flow, including that
on the upstream floodplains, must pass through the bridge opening. This large contraction
results in a large afflux, which is needed to overcome the energy loss as the flow is funnelled
through the bridge and then expands back onto the downstream floodplains. When the
embankment is overtopped at B, there is no need for all of the flow to funnel through the
bridge; the resistance to flow decreases and the afflux reduces

Fig. 6.3 Diagrammatic illust ration of the stage-discharge curve when embankments are overtopped
and form a ‘safety valve’, (a) Flow through the waterway opening. Note the maximum
discharge occurs at B, just before the flow spills over the embankments, (b) Flow over the
embankments, (c) The combined stage—discharge curve equivalent to ABC plus DE.

Page 192

as the difference in water level across the embankments diminishes. Consequently, the
discharge through the bridge opening falls (BC).
Figure 6.3b illustrates the increase in discharge over the embankments with stage.
Obviously, the flow is zero at D, the stage equivalent to the level of the embankments, and
then rises as the head over the embankment crest increases. Figure 6.3c illustrates the
combined stage—discharge relationship for the bridge opening and embankments, the curve
FG being the sum of the curves ABC and DE.
The shape of the curve ABC illustrates clearly that the largest flow through the waterway
opening is that just prior to the embankments being overtopped, and it is at this time that there
may be the greatest risk of damage to the bridge. Subsequently the bridge passes less of the
total discharge, so flow velocities and the potential for scour reduce.

6.2 Road embankments as weirs

If the embankments are either deliberately designed as a ‘safety valve’ or are overtopped
anyway, some means of assessing their hydraulic performance is needed. Often this is built
into computer software, such as HEC-2 (Hydrologic Engineering Center, 1990). Much of this
is based on the work of Kindsvater (1964), who reported on the results of 936 experiments
in volving the discharge characteristics of 17 different model embankments, and 106 boundary
layer velocity traverses on four different models.

6.2.1 Types of flow

Kindsvater identified two main types of flow when an embankment is overtopped: free flow
and submerged flow (Fig. 6.4 and Table 6.1). In the

Table 6.1 Principal characteristics of free and submerged flow over embankments Free flow (plunging
and surface)

Page 193

Fig. 6.4 The main types of flow over an embankment: (a) and (b) are both free flows with critical
depth on the crest and a relatively low tailwater; (c) is a transitional flow; and (d) is a
submerged flow with a relatively high tailwater and a depth greater than critical depth on
the crest.

former case, critical depth ( YC ) always occurs on the crest, as with a broad- crested weir that is
operating freely, whereas in the latter case the critical depth has been eliminated on the crest
as a result of being drowned by the high tail water level.
Free flow can be divided into free plunging flow ( Fig. 6.4a) and free surface flow (Fig.
6.4b). Of the two, plunging flow is the most destructive since it consists of a high -velocity
water jet flowing down the downstream face of the embankment followed by a submerged
hydraulic jump. When the tailwater is sufficiently high the plunging flow goes through a
transition to free

Page 194

surface flow. The stage at which this happens depends upon whether the water level is rising
or falling. If the tailwater level rises sufficiently then a free surface flow will go through a
transition (Fig. 6.4c) and become a submerged flow (Fig. 6.4d). Alternatively, if the tailwater
is high to begin with then the flow may always be of the submerged type.
Which type of flow will occur at a given site depends upon several factors, including the
conveyance of the downstream channel and floodplains, which governs the crucial tailwater
level. It is likely that a bridge that would experience sluice gate type flow (see Section 2.5)
will operate with free flow over the embankment, whereas a bridge that would experience
drowned orifice flow will operate with submerged flow over the embankment. This analogy
to sluice gate and drowned orifice flow extends to the factors affecting the discharge. Table
6.1 shows that with free flow the discharge depends upon the upstream head, whereas with
submerged flow both the upstream and downstream heads influence the discharge.

6.2.2 The discharge equation

With respect to the discharge over a highway embankment, Kindsvater concluded that
embankment shape and relative height have little effect, while the effect of boundary
resistance is appreciable only at smaller heads. Consequently the most practical method of
calculating the discharge is to consider the embankment as a broad -crested weir with critical
de pth (YC) on the longitudinal centreline, or just downstream of the centreline. This equation
can then be used with experimentally determined coefficients of discharge to allow for
different flow conditions and embankment roughness. If the approach embankment is in the
form of a vertical curve, this can be approximated by a series of horizontal weirs with their
crests at different levels. These can be analysed separately and the discharges added to get the
total (Richardson et al., 1990).
The cross -section of the highway is as shown in Fig. 6.5. Assuming critical depth (YC m) on
the crest, then for continuity of flow at the critical section:

Fig. 6.5 Cross-section through an embankment defining the principal variables (not to scale).

Page 195

(6.1)

(6.2)

where Q is the discharge (m3/s) over the embankment, A c is the cross-sectional area of flow
(m 2) at the critical section, LE is the length (m) of the embankment over which the critical
flow occurs, and YC is the critical depth (m). The critical velocity (V C m/s) is

(6.3)

crested weir becomes submerged when a high downstream water level drowns the weir and
eliminates critical flow on the crest. In this submerged condition the coefficient is CS, which
can have a value anywhere between 0.50 and 1.71, and the discharge equation (Bradley,
1978) is

(6.9)

Page 196

Fig. 6.6 Coefficients of discharge for embankments: (a) and (b) are used for free flows with equation
6.8; (c) is used for submerged flows with equation 6.9. (After Bradley, 1978)

The ratio in the square brackets is obtained from Fig. 6.6c and represents the amount by
which the free flow coefficient (CF ) must be reduced to allow for various degrees of
submergence as described by the ratio D/H1 (Fig. 6.5). The value of [CS/CF ] is near 1.0 in the
transition zone as submerged flow begins, reducing to around 0.3 when the downstream water
depth (D) is about the same as the total upstream head (H1).

Page 197

When using Fig. 6.6 it should be appreciated that the graphs present a rather misleading
impression of the accuracy of the coefficients. These diagrams are basically metricated
versions of those pr esented by Bradley (1978). In the original work Kindsvater (1964)
performed experiments on models with different surface roughness and obtained a number of
different relationships for the variation of CF and CS with head. This is illustrated by the
dashed line in Fig. 6.6c. With free flows, when using Figs 6.6a and b it may be pru dent to
reduce CF by about 2% if the embankment is rough (e.g. 1.660 less 2%=1.627). Rough could
perhaps be considered as a gravel surface, and smooth as a paved surface. Kindsvater covered
one of his models in birdshot to increase its roughness; in reality it is reasonable to expect an
embankment covered in bushes to have a slightly lower coefficient than one that is smooth.
What effect crash barriers will have is problematical.

Example 6.1

An embankment and bridge carry a two -lane highway across the river valley shown in Fig
6.2. The width of the carriageways (I) is 35m, and the surfaces of the embankment are
relatively smooth. If the embankment is overtopped dur ing a flood with H=1.000m, what is
the discharge (a) assuming free flow, and (b) that the flow is submerged with D=0.900m?
From Fig. 6.2 the approximate combined average length of the left and right embankments
at the stage involved is LE=2020m.
(a) For the free condition, H1/l=1.000/35=0.0286, which is less than 0.14, so obtain the
value of CF from Fig. 6.6b: with H1=1.000m then CF=1.684. Substitution in equation 6.8 gives

(b) For the drowned condition, D /H1=0.900/1.000=0.9 or 90%, so using the smooth curve
in Fig. 6.6c, CS/DF=0.93. Equation 6.9 gives

Page 198

References

Bradley, J.N. (1978) Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways, 2nd edn, US Department of
Transportation/Federal Highways Administration, Washington DC.
CIRIA (1987) Protection and Provision for Safe Overtopping of Dams and Flood Banks, Construction
Industry Research and Information A ssociation, London.
Highways Agency (1994) Design Manual for Roads and Bridges, Vol. 1, Section 3, Part 6, BA59/94,
The Design of Highway Bridges for Hydraulic Action, HMSO, London.
Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) (1990) HEC -2 Water Surface Profile User’s Manual, US Army
Corps of Engineers, Davis, CA.
Kindsvater, C.E. (1964) Discharge characteristics of embankment-shaped weirs. US Geological
Survey, Water Supply Paper 1617-A, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC.
McKay, G.R. (1970) Pavement drainage. Proceedings of the 5th Conference, Australian Road
Reasearch Board, Canberra, 5(4), pp. 305–326.
Richardson, E.V., Simons, D.B. and Julien, P.Y. (1990) Highways in the river environment. Report no.
FHWA -HI-90–016, National Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean,
Virginia.
Richardson, E.V., Harrison, L.J., Richardson, J.R. and Davis, S.R. (1993) Evaluating Scour at Bridges,
2nd edn. Publication no. FHWA -IP-90–017, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 18, National
Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.

Page 199

7
How to improve flow through a bridge

7.1 Introduction

When designing a new bridge there are occasions when it is desirable to optimise the
hydraulic performance, perhaps because only a very small afflux can be tolerated without
causing flooding upstream. This can be achieved partly by using slender, round-nosed piers
(or eliminating them altogether), spillthrough rather than vertical abutments, and by avoiding
skewed or eccentric openings. However, sometimes it may be necessary to adopt additional
measures to improve the flow through the bridge, such as when economic or other
considerations result in a less than ideal location and alignment for the crossing, or when the
channel is braided or has a tendency to migrate. Under these circumstances some form of
‘improvement works’ may be needed to increase hydraulic efficiency at the design discharge.
If possible these works should be incorporated at the design stage; it is usually less
satisfactory and more expensive to add them at a later date.
Once constructed, bridges do not always behave hydraulically as their designers intended:
the waterway may turn out to be too small for the floods that occur, the backwater too large,
the approach channel may have changed, or scour and structural damage may be much worse
than anticipated. In this case some form of ‘improvement works’ may have to be added.
The term ‘improvement works’ is a very general one, and includes such things as:
• providing either a rounded or chamfered entrance to the waterway opening;
• using wingwalls;
• using spur dykes (guide banks);
• designing a special ‘minimum energy’ waterway;
• using channel improvements, river training works, groynes (spurs), or channel diversions.
All are intended to increase the discharge through a bridge for a given upstream water level,
or to reduce the upstream stage at a given discharge, or to reduce scour. All are describe d in
this chapter. Entrance rounding,

Page 200

wingwalls and channel improvements are probably the most common means of improving the
flow through a bridge, with spur dykes and minimum energy waterways being used less
frequently.
Afflux (backwater) occurs because there has to be an increase in the upstream head of
water to overcome the energy loss as the flow passes through the bridge opening. Inefficient
waterways result in a relatively large energy loss and afflux. If the afflux is 0.5 m on
floodplain s that have a transverse slope of 1 in 100, then for some distance upstream this
results in another 50 m of each floodplain being inundated compared with an unobstructed
channel. If the afflux is larger, or the floodplains flatter, the area of innundation increases
rapidly. Thus even a small reduction in afflux, perhaps through entrance rounding, can be
beneficial.

7.2 Entrance rounding

For brevity, the term ‘rounding’ will be used to indicate that the upstream face of the
waterway opening has either rounded corners or a chamfer; when necessary a distinction will
be made. Entrance rounding is one of the simplest means of improving the hydraulic
performance of a bridge, and has been used for centuries. Telford used a partial chamfer on
some of his arches (Fig. 1.4). At Morpeth, the height of the existing streets and river banks did
not allow the arches to rise well above flood level: hence the need for hydraulic efficiency.
However, Ruddock (1979) wondered whether or not Telford also used a chamfer for aesthetic
reasons. Some modern, rectangular openings have also been constructed with entrance
rounding when hydraulic efficiency is important (Figs. 1.1 and 7.1). Entrance rounding has
been used with culverts to increase the discharge by up to 25% (French, 1969).

Fig. 7.1 A modern bridge at Plympton, Devon, having a rounded soffit and a pier with chamfers.

Page 201

The energy loss incu rred by water flowing through a bridge opening arises as a result of the
flow having to contract and then re-expand in the waterway, as described in Section 2.2. Both
the contraction and expansion cause a loss of energy: the larger the contraction and
subsequent expansion the larger the loss. By rounding the entrance to the opening so that it
more closely matches the curvature of the streamlines, the size of the initial contraction—and
hence the energy loss—can be reduced. Usually the rounding is applied to the upstream face
of the bridge, there being little or no additional improvement if the downstream edges of the
opening are also rounded.
In channel flow, the afflux depends partly upon the severity of the constriction as denoted
by the bridge opening ratio, M. In sluice gate flow (Fig. 7.2a) where the water level rises
above the top of the opening, submerging or drowning the waterway, the opening ratio
becomes unimportant, so the discharge can be calculated from equation 7.1. The subscript u
indicates the centreline at an upstream cross -section, either at the bridge face or one s pan
upstream depending upon which has the largest stage.

(7.1/2.8)

where a W is the maximum cross-sectional area of the full waterway and Z is the mean height
of the opening above bed level. The coefficient of discharge (Cd) is primarily a coefficient of
contraction, so if entrance rounding reduces the contraction of the jet passing through the
opening there is an increase in Cd, and hence Q, for a given upstream water level (Yu). The
discharge through the bridge is determined mainly by Yu and the geometry of the waterway
(i.e. Cd, aW, Z), so the bridge controls the flow. This is referred to as structure control. In
structure control the discharge and upstream water level are independent of the conditions in
the downstream channel. However, when sluice gate flow is just becoming establish ed, the
conditions in the channel may still have an influence on the upstream stage, but this influence
diminishes as Yu increases.
When both the upstream and downstream water levels are above the top of the opening (Fig.
7.2e ) the flow is of the drowned orifice type, and can be described by an equation of the form

Page 202

Fig. 7.2 The effect of entrance rounding (shown diagrammatically, not to scale) is generally to
decrease the upstream depth (Y u) while simultaneously increasing the downstream depth
(Yd). (a) The reduction in upstream depth is sufficient to change sluice gate flow to open
channel flow through the opening (b), often resulting in a relatively large (temporary)
increase in efficiency, (c) Sluice gate flow occurs initially and is maintained with the
rounded entrance (d), but there is a smaller contraction from the soffit resulting in more of
the waterway area being used, a reduced mean velocity in the opening, and a smaller
energy loss, (e) With drowned orifice flow initially, entrance rounding (f) reduces the
differential head ∆H. (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission of the Institution of
Civil Engineers)

Page 203

is a relatively large friction loss, while the interaction between the flow emerging from the
opening and the water in the downstream channel can cause a large loss of energy and the
largest afflux (Hamill and Mclnally, 1990). Again, the effect of entrance rounding is to reduce
the contraction of the jet and to increase the value of Cd, but since the contraction is smaller
than in sluice gate flow (Fig. 2.9d) there is a smaller improvement in the flow.

7.2.1 The effect of rounding on normal depth and afflux

The upstream depth ( Yu) consists of two components, both of which increase with increasing
discharge:

Yu=normal depth+afflux

7.4

For a particular discharge and channel, the normal depth in uniform flow is constant and can
be calculated from the Manning equation, whereas in the case of a channel with an abnormal
stage it is the depth that would be experienced without the bridge (Section 2.3). With low
Froude numbers and/or abnormal stages the afflux may be quite small, the main cause of any
flooding being the large ‘normal’ depth. Thus improvement s to the channel (instead of to the
bridge) may be the best way to alleviate flooding under these conditions.
Entrance rounding reduces the afflux but, because the normal depth is constant, the
equivalent percentage reduction in Yu is smaller (Fig. 7.3). If the normal depth is relatively
large, quite a significant reduction in afflux may result in only a small decrease in Yu. The
afflux can never be reduced to zero, u nless the bridge completely spans the channel and has
no contact with the river (M=1.0). Typically the percentage reduction in afflux as a result of
entrance rounding increases relatively slowly with stage until the opening is close to
submerging, after wh ich it increases more rapidly. Eventually a stage is reached where little
additional benefit accrues and the line becomes more vertical. Thus entrance rounding may be
most effective when Yu/Z is between 0.8 and 1.6 (Hamill, 1997).
When a waterway, particularly a rectangular one with a horizontal soffit, becomes
submerged there is a relatively severe vertical contraction so the opening is used inefficiently
(Figs. 7.2a and 2.9d ). The velocity of the jet is relatively small near the top but large with a
downward component at the bottom, which is why many bridges have a scour pit just
downstream. As described in Section 8.3, a 60% increase in the pier scour depth may be
experienced with a submerged waterway. Entrance rounding reduces the contraction from the
soffit so more of the opening is used, the mean velocity of the jet is lower, and the velocity
distribution is more uniform: hence there is a smaller head loss. To a lesser extent the same
argument applies to the contractions from the abutments , so the overall effect of entrance
rounding is either to increase the discharge through the opening for a given upstream water
level or, for a given discharge, to decrease the upstream water level

Page 204

Fig. 7.3 Illustration of the reduction in afflux and upstream depth obtained by rounding the entrance to
a 200 mm span model arch bridge at a slope of 1:50. The rounding was r/b=0.125, referred
to as R125 later (Fig. 7.4). Channel flow occurred up to Yu /Z ≈1.1, after which sluice gate
flow prevailed. (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission of the Institution of Civil
Engineers)

while simultaneously increasing the downstream water level. Depending upon the stage, the
improved entrance geometry may also change the type of flow in the waterway, such as from
sluice gate flow to channel flow (e.g. Fig. 7.2, a to b), or from supercritical to subcritical.
Generally, entrance rounding reduces the velocity in the opening, so scour in the waterway
and the channel immediately downstream may also be reduced.

7.2.2 Full entrance rounding (Hamill, 1997)

Hamill undertook research specifically to evaluate the effectiveness of ent rance rounding to
arch bridges but, to provide a comparison, also investigated rectangular openings. The aim
was to present the results simply, for ease of use. To some extent, simplicity was preferred to
extreme accuracy, which is probably unattainable an yway. The investigation used bridges
with either a single semicircular arch or a rectangular opening (with b=2Z) and a waterway
length equal to the span, although the research can to some extent be cautiously applied to
other geometries, multispan bridges and short culverts.
Three single -span bridges with arched openings and three with rectangular openings were
tested in a 450mm wide (=B), 15m long tilting channel with a recirculating water supply. The
bridges had spans (=b) of 200mm, 250mm and 300mm (i.e. the bottom width of the arches) so
the ratio M=

Page 205

a/A was between 0.35 and 0.67. The normal depth flow was almost always subcritical,
although supercritical flow sometimes occurred in the opening and in the channel just
downstream.
For each bridge there were two sets of plywood templates of 6mm, 12 mm and 25 mm
nominal thickness, one set having a rounded edge with a radius (r) equal to the thickness of
the plywood (Fig. 7.4), the second having a 45° chamfer with a width (r) equal to that of the
plywood. The six different forms of entrance rounding for each bridge were identified by the
ratio r/b, plus the letters R and C to denote rounded and chamfered entrances. Thus, for a
12mm thick template and a 250mm wide arch with a chamfer the ratio was 12/250 or C0.048.
For convenience these values have been multiplied by 1000 and rounded so C0.048 becomes
C50. The nine nominal ratios shown in Table 7.1 result from using three plywood thicknesses
with three different bridge spans. The templates were placed against the upstream face of the
bridges and the improvement in hydraulic performance measured. Initial experiments showed
that with the 6mm ply there was no significant difference between a rounded edge and a
chamfer, so only the chamfered templates were used and a dual designation adopted (i.e.
RC20, RC25 and RC30). Only 45° chamfers were considered; some idea of how 30° and 60°
chamfers may compare can be obtained from Section 7.2.4. On a few occasions the plywood
templates were placed on the downstream bridge face to see if this resulted in any
improvement; as expected, it did not, so this was dismissed.
The model results were presented in terms of non -dimensional parameters to make them
applicable to full -size bridges. With stage this was

Fig. 7.4 Definition of rounded and chamfered templates. The thickness of the plywood (r) equals (a)
the radius of curvature of a rounded entrance and (b) the width of the 45° chamfer. Thus for
either configuration the ratio r/b describes the degree of rounding, where b is the span of
the opening. For convenience these values are multiplied by 1000 in Table 7.1 . (After
Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission of the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Table 7.1 Values of r/b (×1000) for the model spans and template thicknesses

Page 206

Template thickness (mm)

200mm

Span
250mm

300mm

6
12
25

30
60
125

25
50
100

20
40
85

After Hamill (1997); reproduced with permission, Institution of Civil Engineers

achieved by dividing the maximum upstream water depth by the height of the opening to
obtain the proportional depth (Yu/Z). For discharge, the actual discharge (Q) was divided by
the nominal discharge capacity of the opening running full (QF ) to obtain the proportional
discharge (Q /QF). In reality there is no unique value of QF , because in channel flow QF
depends upon such factors as roughness, gradient and normal depth. However, when structure
control becomes fully established there are just two stage -discharge relationships, one
representing sluice gate flow and one drowned orifice flow, with the latter being the higher of
the two. Thus at Yu/Z=2 it was possible to identify one specific discharge (designated Q2F)
corresponding to sluice gate flow and one to drowned orifice flow. The nominal discharge
equivalent to the opening running full (QF) with Yu/Z= 1.0 was taken as QF=Q2F /2. The
resulting values are shown in Table 7.2 . For real bridges the approximate value of QF can be
calculated if it is unknown; see Examples 7.2 and 7.3.
The results from all six model bridges were superimposed using the proportional depths
and discharges to produce one non -dimensional stage—

Table 7.2 Nominal capacity of arch and rectangular model waterways flowing full (QF)

Arch
Span (mm)

200
250
300

Rectangular
Span (mm)

200
250
300

QF sluice gate flow (l/s)

QF drowned orifice flow (l/s)

7.80
13.25
21.88

QF sluice gate flow (l/s)

QF drowned orifice flow (l/s)

8.90
16.40
26.30

7.10
12.20
18.08

8.50
14.25
20.70

After Hamill (1997); reproduced with permission, Institution of Civil Engineers

discharge relationship for sluice gate flow (Fig. 7.5) and one for drowned orifice flow (Fig.
7.6). In the model tests, sluice gate flow almost always occurred with the normal depth
Froude number FN >0.25, and drowned orifice flow with FN<0.25. The relatively wide
distribution of points below Yu/Z=1.1 represents channel control. The single relationship at
higher stages represents structure control; some of the scatter is due to the difficulty of
measuring rapidly fluctuating water levels accurately.

Page 207

Fig. 7.5 Non-dimensional stage-discharge curve for arch and rectangular openings operating with
FN>0.25 (i.e. sluice gate flow when the opening becomes submerged). The squares
represent individual experimental results. (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission
of the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Fig. 7.6 Non-dimensional stage—discharge curve for arch and rectangular openings operating with
FN<0.25 (i.e. drowned orifice flow when the opening becomes submerged). The squares
represent individual experimental results. (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission
of the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Page 208

By placing rounded templates in front of the model bridges and then applying the
procedure described above, non -dimensional stage—discharge curves were obtained for each
of the new entrance geometries. By comparison with the equivalent bridge curve or by direct
calculation, the reduction in upstream depth, increase in discharge and the new coefficient of
discharge due to entrance rounding could be determined. The results are shown in Figs. 7.7–
7.9. Note that both Fig. 7.7 and Fig. 7.8 a re plotted with the initial value of the upstream depth
(Y u/Z) or initial differential head (∆H/Z) on the horizontal axis, and that ∆H /Z=0 corresponds
to Yu/Z= 1.1 because it is only above this stage that the opening is submerged. To determine
the effect of entrance rounding, enter the graph at the appropriate Yu/Z or ∆H /Z , move
vertically up to the desired r/b ratio, and then move horizontally across to obtain the
associated improvement.
In most cases the increase in discharge (∆Q) obtained by changing a square-edged opening
to a rounded entrance was measured directly by keeping the upstream water level at the same
value and then comparing the flow rates. This was necessary because, particularly with
drowned orifice flow, when the inlet geometry was altered the downstream water level
changed significantly (as well as the upstream stage, of course). Thus the calculation of the C d
values from equations 7.2 and 7.3 always had to be based on observed downstream water
levels. Similarly, although it would be possible to calculate the increase in discharge resulting
from entrance rounding by assuming a constant upstream stage and then using the Cd values
in Fig. 7.9, this would be less accurate than obtaining ∆Q from Fig. 7.8 because it would
assume that the downstream conditions remained unchanged, which would not be the case.
Figure 7.9 therefore shows the actual value of Yu/Z or ΔH /Z on the horizontal axis (not the
initial value as in Figs 7.7 and 7.8) while the vertical scale shows the equivalent C d (not the
improvement). The improvement in Cd is apparent from the spread of the lines. For example,
Fig. 7.9a indicates that with an arch, F N >0.25 and Yu /Z =1.2, the Cd of the bridge is 0.52 but
with R125 rounding it is 0.59 at the same upstream stage.
Comparison of the graphs with the raw experimental data indicated good accuracy: typical
differences in ∆Yu/Z and ∆Q/QF were of the order of +0.8% in channel flow, +1.5% in
drowned orifice flow and +2.5% in sluice gate flow (see Example 7.1). Examples 7.1–7.3
illustrate that the method is reasonably accurate and easy to use, even with limited data.
However, it is essential that all charts are regarded as approximate and the recommendations
as guidelines, not absolute rules that are always valid under all circumstances.

Interpretation of the results
Drowned orifice flow was relatively difficult to analyse because small changes in the
difference between two fluctuating water levels had to be

Page 209

Fig. 7.7 Reduction in upstream depth for various degree of entrance rounding and waterway shape: (a)
arch, sluice gate flow with FN> 0.25; (b) rectangular, sluice gate flow with FN>0.25; (c)
arch, drowned orifice flow with FN<0.25; (d) rectangular, drowned orifice flow with
FN<0.25. The horizontal axis represents the initial starting condition corresponding to a
square-edged opening. Use graphs (a) and (b) when FN>0.25 and (c) and (d) when FN<0.25
(including the channel flow condition). (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission of
the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Page 210

Fig. 7.8 Increase in proportional discharge for various degrees of entrancer rounding and waterway
shape: (a) arch, sluice gate flow with FN>0.25; (b) rectangular, sluice gate flow with
FN>0.25; (c) arch, drowned orifice flow with FN<0.25; (d) rectangular, drowned orifice
flow with FN<0.25. the horizontal axis represents the initial starting condition
corresponding to a square-edged opening. Use graphs (a) and (b) when FN>0.25 and (d)
when FN<0.25 (including the channel flow condition). (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by
permission of the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Page 211

Fig. 7.9 Discharge coefficients corresponding to the actual stage observed with the round entrance in
place: (a) arch, sluice gate flow with FN>0.25; (b) rectangular, sluice gate flow with
FN>0.25; (c) arch, drowned orifice flow with FN<0.25; (d) rectangular, drowned orifice
flow with FN<0.25. The line marked 'Bridge' corresponds to a normal square-edged
opening. Use graphs (a) study. (After Hamill, 1997. Reproduced by permission of the
Institution of Civil Engineers)

Page 212

measured. Consequently it was not always possible to distinguish between RC25 and RC30,
or R100 and R125. Also, with a small value of M (e.g. 0.4), there may be a period of sluice
gate flow before the transition to drowned orifice flow. When applying equation 7.2 the
opening must be totally submerged at the downstream face (say Yd>>1.1Z); otherwise this
adds to the scatter. This is also true of the upstream face. When Yu/Z is between 1.1 and 1.3
the flow is always unstable and unpredictable to some extent: sometimes there was a large
drawdown of the water surface as it approached the model opening, or the opening alternated
between the free and submerged condition at the upstream face, and possibly the downstream
face. Under these conditions model scale effects are likely to be significant, so the Cd values
in this region are not reliable. Even with full-size bridges the flow in this zone is
unpredicatable (see Fig 2.7).
In channel flow the increase in discharge or reduction in upstream stage that can be
obtained through entrance rounding is relatively small, particularly below Yu/Z=0.8. If this
improvement has to be relied upon to alleviate flooding, it may be wise to seek an alternative
solution. However, when the opening is submerged and the vertical contraction is large,
significant reductions in stage or increase in discharge can be achieved, particularly in sluice
gate flow (e.g. Figs 7.7b and 7.8b). At times the reduction in stage that could be achieved
simply by adding a template with rounded edges was quite remarkable, and almost any form
of rounded entrance or chamfer with r/b>25 can significantly improve the performance of a
bridge. With r/b <30 there was no difference between a rounded and chamfered entrance. Up
to r/b=50 there was little difference between the two, but over 50 a rounded entrance was
always superior to a chamfer. The performance of C85 and C125 was substantially the same,
so it may be assumed that there was an upper limit (85) to the width of chamfer that was
effective, and that going beyond this produced a diminishing or negligible return. Generally
R60 gave the same performance as C125. The rounded entrance with r/b= 125 was clearly
superior under all test conditions and should be adopted when the optimum performance is
required. An upper limit to the effectiveness of a rounded entrance was not clear, although
with the arches there was some indication that beyond R100 the increase in performance was
starting to diminish. With rectangular openings, the very pronounced contraction from the
horizontal soffit may mean that the limit of effectiveness is not reached so quickly.
As with all research, ideally the results should not be applied outside the range of the
original observations. For instance, all the models used had a span (b) equal to 2Z. Waterways
with significantly different proportions or opening ratios may perform differently. This,
coupled with different methodologies, makes comparison with other investigations difficult.
For example, Matthai (1967) did not differentiate between sluice gate and drowned orifice
flow, and perhaps as a consequence may have overestimated the increase in discharge due to
entrance rounding under some conditions

Page 213

by between 2% and 10% (e.g. 12% instead of 6%). However, the two studies shared some
conclusions. Mathai found that for rectangular openings and channel flow with r/b<50 the
percentage increase in discharge was in the same range for both rounded and 45° chamfe red
entrances, confirming the earlier observation that the shape is not significant below RC50.
Matthai also found that with the larger ratios a rounded entrance is better than a chamfer.
For rectangular openings operating in sluice gate flow with Yu/Z between 1.1 and 1.5,
Bradley (1978) reported values of Cd between 0.37 and 0.49 (Fig. 2.11), while the
corresponding model values were between 0.45 and 0.50 (Fig. 7.9b). For arched models the
equivalent figures were higher, between 0.52 and 0.55 (Fig 7.9a). Arches have a higher Cd
than rectangular openings, which exhibit a pronounced vertical contraction from the
horizontal soffit. The hybrid, segmental arch bridge at Canns Mill had a Cd of about 0.35 and
0.46 when Yu/Z was 1.1 and 1.35 respectively (Fig. 2.11). Thus all of the upper values are
similar (allowing for the differing Yu/Z). The largest discrepancies, predictably, are around
Yu/Z=1.1 when the flow is unstable and submergence is barely established.
With drowned orifice flow the calculation of Cd was more difficult and less reliable than for
sluice gate flow, so there is a good deal of scatter when Cd values are plotted. Bradley
suggested that the av erage value was around 0.80 over a restricted range of Z/Yu. The model
results were between 0.63 and 0.76, which fits well with Bradley’s observations, Canns Mill
and Roughmoor Bridge when all are plotted together (Figs 2.12 and 7.9c). Roughmoor Bridge
has two segmental arches, and was part of a field study (Hamill and McInally, 1990).
In conclusion, there is general agreement between the various studies undertaken, and it
appears that entrance rounding can significantly increase the hydraulic performance of a
bridge, particularly when it is submerged and there is a large contraction from the upstream
soffit.

7.2.3 Partial entrance rounding (Hamill)

The research described above was concerned with rounding applied uniformly to the entire
upstream face of the opening, but a limited number of experiments were conducted with the
rounding applied to only part of the opening.

Chamfer on the bottom half of the arch only
The 200 mm span arch bridge was used with a 25 mm template with a 45° chamfer (C125) cut
on the bottom half to achieve a geometry similar to that used by Telford for the bridge in Fig.
1.4. Up to Yu/Z=0.5 the performance was of course identical to the normal C125 template.
However, as the stage increased and the square-edged upper part of the arch became
submerged,

Page 214

the performance diminished so that at Yu/Z=1.3 it was roughly equivalent to the fully
chamfered C30. At higher stages the performance was somewhat worse than the C30. It is
logical to assume that a r/b ratio less than C125 would further reduce the improvement
obtained.
Chamfering the bottom of the arch has the merit that this is the part that is in contact with
the flow most often. The principal disadvantages are that the improvement in flow obtained at
low stages is small, while at high stages it does nothing to reduce the very strong vertical
contraction from the soffit. Chamfering the top part of the arch would produce a larger
improvement at high stages, but this is only worthwhile if there is some certainty that floods
reach this level.

Chamfer on the top half of the arch only
This template was similar to the one above bu t with the other (upper) half of the arch
chamfered (C125) to reduce the vertical contraction. This configuration does not improve the
passage of the most common floods that occupy the lower part of the waterway, only those
above the level at which the chamfer starts. Consequently up to Yu/Z=0.5 there was no effect.
At Yu/Z=1.3 it was less effective than the fully chamfered C30, and at Yu/Z= 1.7 about the
same as the C30. At higher stages (Yu/Z=2.5 to 3.5) its performance was better, being similar
to the C60. Thus it was tentatively concluded that with arched openings a small chamfer over
the entire opening is better than a large chamfer over part of it.

Rounding to the soffit of a rectangular opening only
The 200mm span rectangular waterway was used with a 25mm template that had a rounded
soffit cut into it (R125) while leaving the vertical sides square -edged. This is a similar soffit
geometry to that in Fig. 7.1. Openings usually drown at about Yu/Z=1.1, so up to this stage the
performance was identical to the normal bridge. At normal depth Froude numbers below 0.25
(drowned orifice flow), or just above 0.25 with a low degree of submergence, the performance
was between the fully rounded R30 and R60 templates. At higher F N values the performance
was between R60 and R125, usually nearer R60. Thus this configuration was quite effective,
particularly at high FN numbers, since it reduced the strong vertical contraction from the
upstream soffit. Again it is logical to assume that a r/b ratio less than R125 would reduce the
improvement obtained.

7.2.4 Partial entrance rounding (United States Geological Survey—USGS)

The effect of partial entrance rounding in the form of wingwalls was studied by the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) as part of the work

Page 215

summarised in Section 4.2 (Kindsvater et al., 1953; Kindsvater and Carter, 1955; Mathhai,
1967). This included rounded or chamfered (wingwall) entrances to crossings that have
vertical abutments and either vertical or sloping embankments (opening types I and IV: see
Figs 4.2 and 4.3c –f, and 4.11–4.13). Apparently a normal square -edged road deck was
assumed, so the opening had only partial rounding. The results can be applied to rectangular
openings and, to a lesser degree, arched openings (Matthai, 1967). However, this technique
can be di fficult to apply because it requires the evaluation of the opening ratio (M), the Froude
number (F3) at a cross -section between the abutments at the downstream face of the bridge,
and the fall of the water surface (∆h ) between a section upstream of the bridge and the
downstream face. Despite these problems the USGS method provides a means of evaluating
the effect on the discharge of either rounded abutments or wingwalls with a 30°, 45° or 60°
chamfer when operating in channel flow or in the submerged condition.
The procedure is as described in Section 4.2, the only difference being that the adjustment
factors kr , kw and k T are included in equation 4.10, which defines the coefficient of discharge,
C. For opening types I and IV the factors are evaluated as follows:

kr
rounded entrance (Fig. 4.3)
kw 30°, 45° or 60° chamfered entrance (Figs 4.3, 4.12 and 4.13)
kT
submergence of the waterway (Fig 4.17)

The numerical values of C obtained for the various entrance geometries can be used in
equation 4.5 or 4.9 to calculate the discharge (Q) for a given value of ∆h. Since Q is directly
proportional to C (and k r, k w) it is easy to see the effect of entrance rounding. For example,
with a type I opening, M =0.50, a rounded entrance and r/b=0.08 then kr=1.150; with M=0.50
and w/b=0.08 a 30° wingwall gives kw=1.066; with a 45° wingwall kw= 1.106, and with a 60°
wingwall kw=1.218. Note that the coefficient increases with the angle of the wingwall, a 60°
wingwall having a higher value than a rounded entrance. Similarly, with type IV wingwall
embankments an angle of 60° has the largest coefficient. However, Fig. 4.3 (diagrams c–f)
illustrates that there is little point in using a rounded or type I wingwall abutment with
r/b>0.04–0.14 (depending upon M and the type of rounding) because there will be no
a dditional gain. As observed above, the law of diminishing returns applies.

7.3 Abutment type and extended wingwalls

As mentioned briefly in the introduction to the chapter, some types of abutment are
hydraulically more efficient than others so the choice of abutment geometry will affect the
performance of the bridge. The section immediately above illustrated how wingwalls can be
used to increase the coefficient

Page 216

of discharge of an opening. Additionally, spillthrough -type abutments tend to reduce the
backwater (e.g. Fig. 4.21) and the scour depth in the waterway (Table 8.8). Both of these may
be important considerations at the design stage.
Many bridges are designed with wingwalls, which can have two functions. One is structural,
to retain the material forming the approach embankments. The second is hydraulic, to help
funnel the flow into and through the waterway opening. If this is the intention then (in plan)
the wingwalls are usually curved as in Fig. 1.1, or flared outwards as in Fig. 4.11. In either
case the principal effect is to form ‘rounded’ abutments that behave similarly to the
chamfered entrances described above. However, in the examples described so far the
wingwalls did not extend beyond the toe of the embankment. If they do extend beyond the toe
then they start to behave as a partial transition between the opening and the full channel width,
the extent of the transition depending upon how far upstream or downstream they extend. This
may also slightly increase the effective length of the waterway. As described in Section 3.4,,
long waterways are mo re efficient than short ones. With a long waterway there is an initial,
controlled re-expansion within the opening itself, then a secondary expansion into the
downstream channel. With a short waterway there is one large expansion into the downstream
channel. Thus there may sometimes be merit in trying to control the re-expansion by
elongating the waterway, either by extending the wingwalls (see below and Section 7.5) or, if
they are aligned to the flow, by increasing the length of the bridge piers ( Fig. 1.1). However,
this must be done carefully: the scour depth at a skewed pier increases with pier length, as
shown in Fig. 1.15b.
There is relatively little useful information relating to the hydraulic performance of
extended wingwalls. If used appropriately they may improve the flow through a bridge but, as
described above, the law of diminishing returns applies to entrance rounding, and beyond a
certain radius or width of chamfer there is little or no additional gain. Frequently extended
wingwalls may be too short to form an effective transition so, despite their size, they are not
very effective (but see spur dykes in Section 7.4). Hamill conducted some limited experiments
on wingwalls, while Chow (1981) quoted the work of Formica (1955) relating to open
channel transitions.

7.3.1 Extended wingwall transitions (Hamill)

This is a continuation of the work described in Section 7.2.2 and 7.2.3, a few experiments
being conducted with extended wingwalls as a comparison with entrance rounding. A pair of
identical, curved, extended wingwalls each 75 mm wide, 300 mm long and 400 mm high were
placed against the upstream face of bridges having square -edged arched and rectangular
openings. An important point is that with the 300mm rectangular opening placed centrally in
the 450mm wide channel, in plan the wingwalls effec-

Page 217

tively formed curved abutments or transitions between the full channel width and the opening
so that there was no longer a square vertical edge. However, with the 300mm arch, as the
stage increased the roof of the arch curved away from the vertical wingwalls leaving the
square edge of the opening exposed. Thus the model wingwalls could be expected to be most
effective with the 300mm sp an rectangular bridge, less effective with the 300mm arch, and
less effective again when used with smaller -span bridges where the normal square abutments
protrude beyond the wingwalls.
For the 300 mm rectanglular waterway with the perfectly fitting wingwalls the performance
up to submergence at Yu/Z=1.1 was equivalent to R85, and sometimes slightly better.
However, above this stage the wingwalls did nothing to reduce the strong vertical contraction
from the soffit, so by Yu/Z=1.2 they decreased the upstream stage by only about 25% of the
amount that the fully rounded RC20 template did. By around Yu/Z=1.9 the wingwalls had no
effect. The performance of the 300mm arch with the wingwalls was broadly similar to that
described for the rectangular opening. With the 200mm span arch the wingwalls were less
effective than RC30 prior to submergence, and had no effect after submergence. Thus it
would appear that extended upstream wingwalls can be used instead of entrance rounding
with some success up to Yu/Z=1.1, but only if they essentially form a rounded transition from
the full channel width to the opening width (see below). When used inappropriately, they may
be ineffective.

7.3.2 Open channel transitions

Some standard transitions are shown in Fig. 7.10. According to Chow (1981), the higher
losses usually occur with the contractions because they involve both an initial contraction of
the flow and a subsequent re-expansion. Thus there is a conversion of energy from potential
to kinetic

Fig. 7.10 Open channel transitions of various designs: (a) square contraction; (b) straight taper; (c)
rounded taper; (d) square expansion; (e) straight expansion; (f) rounded expansion.

Page 218

and back to potential, which results in less energy being recovered than when there is just the
equivalent expansion. However, there is roughly twice the amount of energy lost in the
expansion than in the contraction (e.g. see Section 2.3.1).
Formica (1955) investigated subcritical flow through open channel transitions of various
design, the widths being 355 mm and 205 mm. Apparently the narrower section had a steeper
bed slope, which may not be the case with bridges, so the results are indicative only. The
difference in the energy loss between the various designs was often only fractions of one
millimetre, which requires great precision and accuracy to achieve consistent results, while
the relationship between the reduction in energy loss and any decrease in upstream afflux or
potential increase in discharge must be inferred. Nevertheless, the work gives an indication of
the effectiveness of various types of transition.
For converging flow, the square contraction in Fig. 7.10a was the worst. A rounded 1:2
taper (c) was the best, reducing the energy loss by about 70%, with a straight 30° taper (b) and
a rounded 1:1 taper being marginally inferior (Chow, 1981). For expanding flow, the square
expansion (d) was generally the least efficient. According to Formica a straight 1:4 expansion
(e) was the best, reducing the energy loss by about 66%. A rounded 1:4 expansion (f) was also
quite effective, as were hybrid designs involving an initial 1:2 or 1:3 straight expansion
followed by a sudden expansion to the full width. However, there is a limit to the length of
transition that is effective, beyond which there is little or no significant gain in efficiency. On
t he other hand, if the transition is too short or the angle of divergence too great the result may
be the same or worse than the original square expansion. For this reason extended wingwalls
that do not form a full and effective transition between a bridge waterway and the downstream
channel are also of limited value.
Mazumder and Ahuja (1978) studied ‘curved’ contracting transitions in open channels.
When seen in plan the geometry adopted was like the tapered neck of a white wine bottle (i.e.
a ‘smoother’ version of Fig. 7.10f). They concluded that for the given shape an average linear
contraction of 1:3 (tranverse: longitudinal) was the optimum and was practically ind ependent
of the Froude number in the throat.
It would appear that open channel transitions, or guide walls, may be effective under some
circumstances if appropriately designed. However, to be successful they may have to be of a
considerable size and will probably have to provide a smooth transition from the full channel
width to the waterway opening and/or back to the full channel width. Ultimately this leads to
the type of transitions used with minimum energy waterways (Section 7.5) that are designed
to reduce or eliminate almost all energy losses except friction. Short transitions, such as
small-radius rounding applied to the downstream face of a bridge opening, are not likely to
have any significant effect.

Page 219

7.4 Spur dykes (or guidewalls)

Spur dykes are essentially large upstream wingwalls. They are not common in Britain, simply
because British rivers are relatively small. However, they are widely used th roughout the
world in situations where a wide floodplain exists and floods have to be funnelled through a
relatively narrow bridge waterway. They are used for two reasons, the first being to improve
the hydraulic efficiency of the opening: according to Brown and Recinos (1988) spur dykes
can reduce bridge backwater by up to 5%, the amount increasing with the Froude number in
the constriction. The second and principal reason is to reduce scour and the potential for
damage to the structure.
Spur dykes are mo st needed where there is a tendency for water to flow along the upstream
face of the highway embankment, so that close to the upstream abutments it meets at 90° the
main flow passing through the bridge (Fig. 7.11a). Apart from the hydraulic inefficiency of
two streams of water meeting like this, the interaction between the streams causes curvilinear
flow, significantly increasing the scour potential. Bradley (1978) quoted a scour depth of 7.6
m at Big Nichols Creek, which may have been much greater since fallen piers and bridge
spans were buried deep in the river bed.
The result of flow along the upstream face of the road embankment is effectively to reduce
the width of the opening, since the sideflow results in a large contraction and a narrow main
jet in the waterway (Fig. 7.11a): the larger the sideflows, the worse the situation. Sideflows
occur most easily where there are upstream borrow pits, drainage ditches parallel to the road
embankments or smooth unobstructed floodplains. The aim of the spur dyke is to guide the
main flow through the opening while simultaneously reducing (or stopping) the sideflow and
moving the point of interaction to the end of the spurs. The deepest scour then occurs near to
the nose of the dyke, where the radius of curvature is sharpest, which is preferable to having
the greatest scour in the vicinity of the abutments and any nearby piers (Highway Research
Board, 1970; Neill, 1973). However, if the scour between the abutments is to be kept to a
minimum, the dyke must be correctly proportioned, which means having an appropriate
geometry, height and length.
Bradley (1978) recommended that the optimum shape for a dyke was a quarter of an ellipse
(Fig 7.12), with a ratio of major (length) to minor (offset) axes of 2.5:1. For bridge crossings
that are perpendicular to the river, the major axis should be at 90° to the highway
embankment. Based on laboratory tests, this geometry worked as well as or better than any
other shape. The length of the dyke required (L s) was determined from model studies
performed at Colorado State University and limited field data collected during flood. It was
based largely on the spur dyke discharge ratio, QfP/Q30 , which is

(7.5)

Page 220

Fig. 7.11 Illustration of the effect of spur dykes when there is significant flow along the face of the
highway embankments. The stippling shows the areas most affected by scour, (a) Without
the spur dykes the flow along the embankment interferes with the main waterway jet,
resulting in a potentially destructive curvilinear flow and high velocities, (b) By
intercepting the flow along the embankment, spur dykes reduce the apparent severity of the
contraction and move the most scour-prone area from the upstream corner of the
embankment to the end of the spur, which is relatively unimportant.

Page 221

This ratio relates the flow over one of the floodplains to the flow through the 30m of the
bridge waterway adjacent to the abutment, both measured at section 1 (Fig. 7.12). This value
is combined with a representative velocity adjacent to the abutment, VN2 (=Q/AN2), which is
the average velocity through the opening at normal depth as in previous chapters. It can be
seen from the figure that the length of dyke needed increases with both Q fP/Q30 and VN2.
For designing a spur dyke Bradley (1978) suggested the following:
• Lean towards overdesign rather than underdesign.
• If the length obtained from the chart is less than 15 m, a spur dyke is not needed.

Fig. 7.12 Chart for determining the approximate length of spur dyke needed. On the inset diagram, the
stippled area on the toe of the dyke illustrates the part most in need of scour protection.
(After Bradley, 1978)

Page 222

• If the length obtained from the chart is between 15 m and 30 m, a spur dyke at least 30m
long should be constructed so that the curvilinear flow around the end of the dyke mer ges
with the flow in the main channel and straightens before reaching the abutment. Schneible
(1966) suggested that 45m should be the standard minimum length since this allows some
damage without reducing effectiveness. Brown and Recinos (1988) reported that short spur
dykes can cause an increased energy gradient and thus greater erosion or scour, so scour
potential should be the controlling factor for selecting a spur length.
• The lengths obtained from Fig 7.12 may also be suitable for skewed crossings.
• There is no direct relationship between dyke length and the span of the bridge, which is why
a 30m width of the opening was considered.
• There is very limited data regarding the performance of spur dykes, so proceed cautiously
and/or (if possible) undertake model tests when designing dykes for any location.
The height of a dyke should be at least 0.3 m above the design flood after allowing for the
contraction of the flow and freeboard, and certainly large enough to avoid overtopping, which
would normally result in serious damage or destruction unless the dyke is properly armoured
or constructed from suitably sized stone. With respect to construction, Bradley sugge sted that
the dykes may be made entirely of rock provided the exposed faces are of stone large enough
to resist movement by the current. Earth dykes should be compacted to the same standard as
the road embankment and should be high enough not to be overtopped. If costs have to be
minimised, then rock armouring is needed only where the scour potential is greatest (Figs
7.11 and 7.12), provided that the remainder is protected by vegetation, turf and/or by the use
of geotextiles or similar, and if repairs are conducted after each major flood. If earth dykes are
faced with rock, it should be well graded, and have an appropriate filter blanket or geotextile
membrane and riprap protection extending to below scour level (Neill, 1973; Hemphill and
Bramley, 1989). With non -cohesive material the riprap protection to the toe of the dyke can
be left on the river bed and ‘launched’ into its final position as the bed is eroded during flood,
whereas with cohesive material the bank protection should be continued down to the expected
worst scour level and the excavation refilled (Fig. 8.35). Other suggestions were to keep trees
as close to the toe of the spur dyke as possible (to reduce transverse flow), to avoid digging
borrow pits or drainage channels along the bottom of the road embankments, and to put a
small pipe through the dyke to drain the area trapped between the spur and the road
embankment.
Although spur dykes are often used in pairs there may be situations where only one is
needed, such as where the flow in a wide channel already occurs along one well-defined river
bank. It is also possible that spur geometries may have to be adjusted to take into account
local conditions, such as a large

Page 223

bend or meander when the curvature may have to be increased on the inside of the bend and
reduced on the outside (Neill, 1973). With skewed crossings the spur may be longer on the
side where the flow becomes trapped, such as the right side of Fig. 3.8 (Richardson et al.,
1990). Richardson and Simons (1984) advised that the spur dykes should be designed to fit
the streamlines of the approach flow, especially with skewed crossings, instead of
automatically being set perpendicular to the embankments.
American practice generally is to use elliptical spur dykes that are convergent in plan. In
India and Pakistan the spur dykes tend to be parallel to the opening and straight, except for a
curved portion at the upstream and downstream ends. Typically the spurs extend 0.75b–1.0b
upstream and 0.1 b–0.25b downstream of a bridge of opening width b. Possibly straight spur
dykes are better at producing a strai ght, parallel flow in the opening, which may be
advantageous if there are piers. Richardson and Simons (1984) provided design guidelines for
either type.
For use with the USGS procedure described in Chapter 4, Matthai (1967) presented charts
for the adjustment factor, kd, relating to straight and elliptical spur dykes used in combination
with type III openings (Figs. 7.13 and 7.14). It is interesting to note that in Fig. 7.14a for
normal crossings (i.e. without skew) the value of kd is between 1.0 and 1.4 depending upon
the conditions and the shape of the dyke, so spur dykes can significantly improve the
coefficient of discharge and the flow through the o pening. The adjustment factor is higher for
the elliptical dyke, supporting Bradley’s observation that this is the best shape.
The elliptical dyke in Fig. 7.13 is basically an extension of the type III abutment. The
adjustment factor (kd) in Fig. 7.14a varies with the opening ratio (M) and the length of the
spur dyke LS, which is expressed as LS/b where b is the average width of the opening.
Diagram a is for ø=0° (i.e. no skew) whereas diagram b is for ø=20° and gives the skew
adjustment factor ka , which is used in addition to kd . For skew angles between 0° and 20°
interpolate between the values obtained from diagrams a and b. Thus for a type III opening
with an elliptical spur dyke the coefficient of discharge, C=C' (kø , kx, k d, ka ), to which may be
added any other adjustment factor required as a result of deviation from the stand ard
conditions, as in equation 4.10 and Figs 4.8−4.10. The value of x used to determine kx should
be measured on the embankment slope as if the dyke did not exist.
The straight dyke in Fig. 7.13 may be set back from the abutment by a variable distance, bd.
The adjustment factor kd varies with LS/b and M (Fig. 7.14c), but another factor is needed to
allow for the variable offset distance bd. This is k b, which is obtained from Fig. 7.14d. Hence
the coefficient of discharge for the type III opening with straight dykes is C =C' (kø, k x, kd , kb)
to which may be added any other adjustment factor required as a result of deviation from the
standard conditions. The value of x used to determine k x should be measured on the
embankment slope as if the dyke did not exist.

Page 224

Fig. 7.13 Definition sketches of elliptical and straight spur dykes. (After Matthai, 1967. Reproduced
by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the Interior)

The addition of a spur dyke increases the friction loss and necessitates an alteration to
equation 4.9, which is used to calculate the discharge explicitly. This involves changing the

last bracket of the denominator from

Page 225

Fig. 7.14 USGS adjustment factors for spur dykes (see the text for details of their use): (a) elliptical
dykes, no skew; (b) elliptical dykes, 20° skew (for other angles interpolate); (c) straight
dykes, no skew; (d) adjustment factor for the offset distance, b d, of straight dykes. (After
Matthai, 1967. Reproduced by permission of US Geological Survey, US Dept of the
Interior)

Page 226

7.5 Minimum energy bridge waterways

A ‘minimum energy’ waterway is different in most respects from anything considered
previously. A conventional, subcritical waterway generally consists of a sudden contraction
followed by a sudden expansion, which results in a significant energy loss. To ov ercome this
energy loss there is an increase in the upstream water level (the afflux) so that the flow
accelerates through the opening. A minimum energy waterway achieves the same thing not by
causing an afflux, but by using three-dimensional streamlining to accelerate the flow and to
eliminate all energy losses other than friction, which is very small or negligible. With a
negligible energy loss there is a negligible afflux.
Minimum energy designs consist of three main sections: the converging inlet trans ition; the
bridge opening (or throat), which usually has a constant width and a level bed; and the
diverging outlet transition. Since the plan shape is determined by drawing the flow net for
two-dimensional irrotational flow, the inlet and outlet transitions are usually curved (Fig.
7.15a and b). The entire structure is streamlined to eliminate energy losses so it is often
assumed that the total energy is constant throughout: hence minimum energy waterways are
also referred to as ‘constant energy’ waterways (Fig. 7.15c).
The purpose of the narrowing inlet transition or fan is to reduce smoothly the width of the
channel from its original value (B) to the width of the bridge opening (b). Ideally, to minimise
the width of the opening, this should also be accompanied by a gradual fall in the elevation of
the bed. The inlet serves to accelerate the flow, usually (but not necessarily) to the critical
condition, so that at the design discharge, critical depth is maintained throughout the opening.
Critical depth (Yc) corresponds to the minimum specific energy that can maintain a given
discharge, and so is theoretically the most efficient flow condition ( Fig. 7.16). An alternative
way of expressing this is that at the critical depth the maximum discharge is obtained for the
available specific energy. Minimum energy waterways are designed to utilise this fact, and in
appropriate circumstances can result in much smalle r openings than conventional designs.
Critical depth can be achieved either by a reduction in width alone or by a combination of a
reduction in width and a downward slope of the river bed as it enters the opening (Fig.
7.15and c). By depressing or lowering the invert a narrower bridge opening is obtained than
with a simple width constriction. The opening itself usually has a constant width and a flat
bed (long culverts can be designed with a slope equal to the friction loss). In the outlet
transition the channel widens and the bed rises back to its normal downstream width and level.
Thus some of the novel design concepts usually inherent with minimum energy waterways are
a constant total energy, negligible afflux, a totally streamlined design that involves a
depressed bridge opening, and flow at the critical depth throughout the opening.

Page 227

Fig. 7.15 Details of minimum energy waterway in Example 7.4: (a) plan view of inlet fan, throat and
outlet fan; (b) geometry of inlet fan and throat—general details above the centreline,
lengths specific to Example 7.4 below; (c) longitudinal centreline profile showing the
horizontal (constant) total energy line and the depressed invert.

Page 228

Fig. 7.16 Specific energy curves relating to Example 7.4 . Note the vertical nature of the Y-ES curve at
the critical depth, which can result in flow instability.

The idea of the minimum energy waterways first appeared in Australia in the 1960s and 1970s
(McKay, 1970, 1978). More or less simultaneously Cottman was puzzling over the problem
of existing roads with inadequately sized waterways that crossed dry, or almost dry, river beds.
These structures were prone to flood damage. The provision of adequate openings was
considered too expensive, so instead attempts were made to increase the capacity of the
existing openings by streamlining the approach and exit to enable floods to pass with
minimum afflux, minimum damage and maximum hydraulic efficiency. Ultimately, this
resulted in three -dimensional streamlining and the minimum energy waterway, which is
theoretically the optimum design (Cottman, 1981; Apelt, 1981).
An analogy can be used to illustrate why minimum energy waterways are effective. In pipe
flow, an orifice plate forms a sudden contraction resulting in a large head loss and a relatively
low coefficient of discharge. This may be considered equivalent to a conventional bridge
waterway. A streamlined Venturi meter forms a relatively small obstacle to flow, results in a
small loss of head, and has a relativel y high coefficient of discharge. This may be considered
as equivalent to the minimum or constant energy waterway. However, this simple analogy
does not include the additional advantage of maximising efficiency by inducing critical flow
at the design discha rge.

Page 229

Although minimum energy waterways and culverts have their advocates, they have never
been unanimously accepted (Griffiths, 1978). Concerns are frequently raised regarding: the
wisdom of designing at the critical depth, which is relatively unstable, so that a small change
in specific energy can result in a significant change in the depth of flow (Fig. 7.16); the
difficulty of calcula ting longitudinal flow profiles accurately; the possibility of the
deliberately ‘undersized’ opening being blocked by debris during flood; and problems relating
to siltation and scour ( Section 7.5.4). In defence of the concept, it is pointed out that while
minimum energy structures are usually designed to operate at the critical depth because this
makes the calculations easier (Section 7.5.1) and results in the smallest opening, they can be
designed to operate subcritically if desired. In addition, successful minimum energy
waterways have been constructed, and these have passed floods larger than the design flow
and operated without trouble for decades (Cottman, 1981; Cottman and McKay, 1990).
Although some minimum energy structures have been only partially successful or
unsuccessful, this is usually due to a failure to understand and implement fully the design
concept (e.g. by omitting the streamlined outlet fan). Thus minimum energy waterways are
not something to be considered without first having consulted the full literature (not just a
summary) and having decided whether the prevailing conditions are suitable.
If minimum energy waterways are to be effective they must be designed with total
commitment to the principles involved, and constructed only where the conditions are suitable,
success being unlikely otherwise. Cottman and McKay (1990) reported that minimum energy
designs were suitable for:
• bridging or culverting relatively wide, shallow subcritical flows;
• increasing the flow capacity of bridges when the soffits are high enough and the bed can be
lowered;
• passing fl ow under fords or floodways;
• equalising flood levels across causeways;
• controlling the level of lakes and swamps;
• enabling limited low -lying areas to be reclaimed (McKay, 1970, 1978).
Minimum energy waterways are economical, and particularly suited to streams that flow
intermittently and which are dry between floods.
Minimum energy waterways are not suited to permanently flowing streams or estuaries,
where a conventional piled structure would probably be cheaper. Their economical advantage
is als o doubtful if the abutment height exceeds 6m or when the throat is less than 6m long.
Additionally, they are not suited to situations where:
• the flow is naturally deep, fast and well defined;
• the streams are steep, with wide supercritical flows over bedrock or bouldery beds;

Page 230

• underground services make the lowering of the waterway entrance expensive;
• ponded water (that cannot be drained) in the lowered parts of the waterway is unacceptable,
such as in urban areas;
• a backwater from further downstream drowns the waterway and prevents it from operating
at the critical depth—if this is likely to be a problem then a good knowledge of the stage -
discharge curve and flow behaviour at the site is required before considering such a
structure.
The need for bridge piers may also cause problems, as described in Section 7.5.3.
The capacity of an existing bridge opening can be increased by turning it into a minimum
energy waterway, provided the bed can be lowered and the existing deck is at a suitable level.
This may lead to a much reduced afflux (or almost zero afflux) while also allowing a larger
flood to be passed without significant scour or damage to the structure. Cottman and McKay
(1990) quoted as an example the twin 7.5 m span Newington Bridge, which crossed a
floodplain. Its capacity was enlarged from 23 m3/s to a design discharge of 141.5 m 3/s (and
the backwater reduced at all flows) through conversion to a minimum energy waterway. The
cost involved was about one-sixth of the alternative, which was to add an extra 10 spans.
However, there are situations where a minimum energy waterway may be the most economic
option to begin with, namely where large, intermittent flows occur in wide channels and it is
desirable to construct the smallest crossing possible. McKay (1970) described a situation in
the Northern Territory of Australia where roads have to cross 8 km (5 mile) wide river valleys,
which on occasions carry enormous flows at very low velocities (0.15m/s), where any
economic embankment is likely to be overtopped, and where there is a shortage of stone for
protection works. The alternative to a conventional crossing was to carry the flow equivalent
to the height of the embankment through minimum energy culverts without afflux, thus
minimising the head difference across the embankment so that flow over the roadway could
occur with relatively little damage.

7.5.1 Equations for critical flow in a rectangular channel

Since minimum energy waterways are normally designed to operate at critical depth at the
design discharge, it is useful to review the relevant principles and equations pertaining to
critical flow. Usually rectangular openings are constructed which, because the geometry of a
rectangle is easy to define, simplifies the equations. When dealing with critical flow it is often
most convenient to work with specific energy (instead of total energy). The specific energy
(E S) is the energy calculated above bed level:

Page 231

where Y is the depth of flow and V2/2 g is the velocity head. Now in a rectangular channel the
critical velocity (VC ) at which the flow becomes critical is given by

V C =(gYC)1/2

(7.7)

where YC is the critical depth of flow corresponding to V C. Substitution of this expression for
V C and the critical depth (YC) into equation 7.6 results in the equation for critical specific
energy (ESC):

or YC=0.667ESC

(7.8)

(7.9)

Thus for a rectangular channel a characteristic of critical flow is that the critical velocity head
equals 0.5YC . The critical depth (YC ) is easily calculated as two-thirds of the critical specific
energy.
The design of a minimum energy waterway assumes that there is no loss of energy from
inlet to outlet and that the total energy (or head) line is horizontal, so this provides a very
conv enient datum to work from. By calculating the specific energy at any cross-section and
measuring down from the total energy line the required bed level can be obtained (Fig. 7.15c ).
This is illustrated in Example 7.4 .
The total discharge (QC) in a rectangular channel (of width, B) flowing at critical depth is

QC=B YC VC

(7.10)

For the specific case of a minimum energy transition, the channel width must be measured
along the orthogonals to the streamlines. For example, it is along the curved line 111 in Fig.
7.15 that the flow must become critical, not along a line at right -angles to the centreline. Thus
replacing the channel width (B) with the width of the curved orthogonal (W) and using
equation 7.7 to replace VC gives

QC=WY C (gYC)1/2
=W(gYC)1/2

and YC=(QC/gW2)1/3

(7.11)

(7.12)

This equation illustrates that for a given value of QC the critical depth is inversely
proportional to the channel width, so as the approach to the bridge waterway narrows the
critical depth increases, then decreases again as the channel widens downstream of the
opening. Equations 7.12 and 7.8 also illustrate that once the inlet fan has accelerated the flow
to the critical depth with F=1.00, the only way to maintain this condition is either to

keep the channel width (W) constant or to simultaneously narrow the channel while dropping
the invert to accommodate the increased specific energy and depth of flow. The latter is
usually adopted because it allows a narrower crossing.
Equation 7.12 is often written in terms of the discharge per metre width of channel (qC ),
where

Page 232

From equation 7.9, YC=0.667E SC and g=9.81 m/s2, so:

and ESC=(qC /1.705)2/3

(7.13)

(7.15)

(7.16)

(7.17)

These are the critical flow equations relating the total design discharge (QC ), or the equivalent
unit discharge (qC), to the corresponding critical depth (YC) and critical specific energy (E SC).
They are used in Example 7.4 to design a minimum energy waterway.

7.5.2 A more detailed description of a minimum energy waterway

One of the controversial aspects of minimum energy waterways is that they are designed to
optimise the passage of a particular design flood, whereas most of the floods encountered will
be of a different magnitude. There is often some concern as to how such a waterway will
perform under these conditions. If Q<QC then a subcritica l flow will probably be obtained,
and the actual depth of flow (Y) will be greater than YC. Thus when designing a minimum
energy waterway it must be remembered that the soffit should be high enough to cope with
subcritical depths substantially greater than YC. If possible, the soffit level should be above the
maximum total energy level occurring upstream. If Q>QC then initially it is likely that critical
flow will be maintained through a greater length of the waterway than at the design discharge.
This can often be tolerated, but it is possible that the flow might choke (Section 3.3.3). So to
summarise, in a minimum energy waterway as the discharge increases from zero the depth of
flow will increase to a maximum subcritical level, after which it will fall to

Page 233

the design critical depth and then start to rise again as the discharge continues to increase.
The shape of the whole structure is determined by drawing streamlines (Fig. 7.15), the
general aim being to capture as much of the flow as required and to pass it smoothly through
the waterway without causing separation of the flow, form drag or anything that will result in
loss of energy (bridge piers can be a problem; see Section 7.5.3). Apelt (1981) warned that if
the ratio of length/width of the inlet fan is made too small the flow will no longer be
controlled by its plan shape and will enter almost as a parallel flow that chokes before it
reaches the throat. A minimum length/ B of about 0.5 was recommended. Cottman and McKay
(1990) suggested that the overall length of the transitions needs to be from 1 to 3 times (B—b),
but also gave the dimensions of a generalised plan that can usually be adopted. Whether or not
the fans are totally curved in plan or consist of several straight lines is not too important as
long as the deflection angle between short lengths of straight guidewall is limited to 6°, the
bed level is calculated accordingly, and the flow net principle is adhered to. The orthogonal
lines drawn at right angles to the streamli nes can be thought of as contours: the elevation of
the bed should be constant along these lines. Since it is the length (W) of these lines that
represents the width of the channel (not the width, B, perpendicular to the centreline), they are
often assumed to be part of the perimeter of a circle for ease of calculation (Fig. 7.15b).
Initially the approaching subcritical flow must be spread uniformly across the whole w idth
of the upstream channel at section 000, where the upstream transition begins, otherwise the
flow net is invalid. If this does not occur naturally it can be achieved artificially by altering
the channel, constructing some form of spreading basin, or by splitting the channel with each
subchannel leading to an individually designed opening. An uneven approach flow or
conditions not meeting the assumptions will lead to increased energy losses or a reduced flow
capacity, or sometimes the occurrence of large -amplitude standing waves on the surface of the
flow (Apelt, 1981).
The inlet and exit fans can be mirror images of each other in plan, or they can be adjusted
to suit the requirements of the site so that they are very different. Similarly, although the
e ntrance to the inlet fan and exit of the outlet fan can be designed with the same invert level,
at most sites there would be a natural fall of the energy line and bed level from section 000 to
555. This can be allowed for by designing the waterway according to minimum energy
principles, then rotating the design about the inlet lip. Over -rotation may lead to supercritical
flow in part of the waterway. Under -rotation or the failure to allow for friction losses may
lead to choking. Friction losses are normally very small or negligible, but obviously increase
with the length of the waterway.
For both the inlet and outlet fans, starting with the design disharge (QC) the calculations can
progress using either:

Page 234

• the bed gradient (i.e. E SC, which is the difference between the horizontal total energy line
and the bed level), which enables YC, qC , and W to be calculated from equations 7.9, 7.16
and 7.13; or
• the boundaries of the fans (i.e. the channel width, W, obtained from the flow net), in which
case qC, E SC (and hence the bed level) and YC can be calculated from equations 7.13, 7.17
and 7.9.
The various parts of the waterway will now be considered in more detail.

Section 000 to 111: start of the inlet transition to the lip of the fan
This part of the inlet transition usually consists of an unlined levelled bed. The bed can be flat
in the direction of flow, but if a fall is required a gradient of 1:50 is reputedly a good choice
for bridges with large flows (1:30 for culverts) with a range of 1:15 to 1:100 having worked
well (Cottman and McKay, 1990).
The upstream end of the fan should be wide enough to collect all of the flow from the
channel that has to be funnelled through the waterway. The distribution of the flow across the
channel should be approximately uniform, and the entrance velocity should be less than 1.0
m/s. In any case, at 000 the flow must be subcritical at depth Y0 . However, as the channel
narrows, to maintain continuity of flow the velocity must increase, and the design necessitates
that critical depth (YC1) is achieved by section 111.

Section 111 to 222: inlet lip to the inlet of the throat
This section slopes downwards to accelerate the flow, the slope being determined by the
designer (in conjunction with the width, W) with the aim of keeping the flow at crititical depth
with F=1.0. However, the practical range of bed gradients is 1:4 to 1:15 with 1:7 being a good
compromise according to Cottman and McKay (1990). They also suggest that the part of the
transition near to the opening entrance (perhaps 3–10 m but rarely extending beyond the toe
of the batter of the roadfill) would normally be concreted.
Although Cottman and McKay suggested that the shape of the inlet transition could be
determined purely from a flow net, they also gave a detailed generalised plan with relevant
dimensions and radii of transitions, as shown in simplified form in Fig. 7.15. This indicates
that the outer part of the fan is a sector of a circle with an angle of 90° at the centre, changing
to 45° between section 111 and 222.

Section 222 to 333: the bridge waterway
This is usually constructed with a horizontal, concrete bed and with a uniform width, b. Again
the flow is critical with F=1.0.

Page 235

Section 333 to 444: exit of the waterway to the lip of the outlet fan
The bed of this part of the outlet transition slopes upwards while the width of the channel
increases, slowing the flow. The objective is to maintain the flow at the critical depth with
F=1.0 up to the lip of the outlet fan. The design uses basically the same principles as section
111 to 222. The construction would also be similar to the equivalent part of the inlet.

Section 444 to 555: lip of the outlet fan to the end of the outlet transition
This is a region of decelerating flow and decreasing Froude number as the channel widens and
the flow returns to the subcritical condition. The bed would usually be level, or nearly level,
and constructed of natural material. This can be considered the reverse of the equivalent part
of the upstream transition.
An example of the design of a minimum energy waterway is included as Example 7.4. The
plan dimensions follow Cottman and McKay (1990). They presented a chart to simplify the
hydraulic design, but this is not used because the equations in Section 7.5.1 provide a better
illustration of the principles involved.

7.5.3 Bridge piers

Piers can cause a problem with minimum energy waterways (McKay, 1978; Apelt, 1981). Just
outside the bridge opening the wid th of the channel is W (or B ) while just inside the opening
the width is W minus the combined width of the piers. In other words, the width of the
channel is reduced instantaneously from W to b by the piers. This means that there will be an
instantaneous increase in qC , YC and ESC (equations 7.13, 7.14 and 7.17), which requires an
instantaneous drop in the level of the bed to maintain critical flow. This is impractical,
because instantaneous changes in flow can rarely, if ever, be achieved. On the other hand,
with a single -span waterway W=b and there is no problem.
There are two possible solutions to the problem of bridge piers. The first is to split the
approach channel into subchannels, each of which leads to an individually designed minimum
energy waterway. Thus the piers become ‘islands’ between the various channels. The second
solution is to introduce the piers gradually from bed level (i.e. the piers are raked in the
direction of flow) while gradually lowering the bed, as shown in Fig. 7.17. According to
McKay, piers of constant thickness with a half -round nose and sloping at 45° will effect a
reasonably smooth transition. This does not work with pile bents, so it is logical to avoid
converting an existing bridge of this type to a minimum energy waterway, while with new
construction the designer can decide what type of pier to adopt.

Page 236

Fig. 7.17 Use of 45° raked central piers with minimum energy waterways. The pier is gradually
introduced to the flow and the invert is lowered to compensate for the change in specific
energy arising from the sudden reduction in channel width caused by the pier.

7.5.4 Siltation, scour and performance

The question of siltation and scour frequently arises in connection with minimum energy
waterways. Siltation is perceived as a particular problem when the waterway has a depressed
invert. However, this is not the case during flood when the velocity through the bridge
opening is higher than in the inlet transition, so anything that is carried in should be carried
out, and possibly away (McKay, 1970). It is possible that some siltation may occur on a
falling stage, but unless the sediment is cohesive, becomes baked hard or covered in
vegetation, this will normally be removed again when the flow increases. Scour is usually
assumed to be a problem because velocities can be relatively high, perhaps 5m/s or so in the
throat of a minimum energy waterway. McKay (1978) argued that if form losses are
eliminated entirely through streamlining then the system becomes incredibly smooth, so there
is no large-scale turbulence and hence no scour despite the high velocities.
Some measure of independent assessment of minimum energy structures was provided by
Loveless (1984), who used relatively small-scale model tests to compare the performance of a
standard and minimum energy culvert design, including the effects of sedimentation and scour.
The standard culvert had wingwalls set at 30° to the centreline and a level bed throughout.

Page 237

The minimum energy design had a depressed waterway, but unfortunately the outlet transition
had to be truncated slightly, so the design was not ideal. This should be borne in mind when
interpreting the results.
At the design discharge (QC) it was found that the afflux of the minimum energy culvert
was 28% of that for the conventional culvert design. Theoretically the afflux should have been
zero. Loveless attributed the difference to the truncated outlet fan, and the fact that the theory
assumes that critical d epth will occur in the control sections rather than showing that it must.
At Yu/Z=0.4 the minimum energy structure passed 100% more flow than the conventional
culvert, and at Yu/Z=0.9 it passed 80% more flow (QC corresponded to about Yu/Z=0.73). By
Yu/Z=1.2 the discharge was about 31% greater than QC and the advantage of the minimum
energy design had diminished significantly, but it still discharged much more than the
standard culvert.
With respect to siltation, Loveless assumed that the worst condition fo r the minimum
energy culvert would be when the lowered invert had been completely filled with sediment,
effectively turning it back into a conventional structure. Two types of sediment were used:
sand and gravel. The sand began to move in the throat at a f low equal to 5% of QC; it was
substantially cleared at 20% of QC and was completely cleared at 30% of QC . The gravel
began to move at 30% of QC ; it was substantially cleared at 44% of QC and completely
cleared at 65% of QC . It was concluded that provided that the sediment is not cohesive, even
large boulders would be removed from the depressed culvert throat well below the design
discharge. It was also pointed out that when the discharge is about 66–90% of the design
value the bed profile of a minimum energy culvert is identical to that which would be
obtained if the bed was erodible.
With respect to scour, even with the gravel the conventional culvert produced a deep scour
hole at flows greater than 45% of the design discharge, QC. In contrast, the minimum energy
design resulted in no scouring of the gravel below a discharge of 1.18 QC , and relatively slight
scouring of the sand bed at the design discharge.
The conclusions drawn by Loveless are worth repeating:
• A well -designed minimum energy culvert can discharge twice the flow of a standard design
of the same size.
• Although siltation may occur in the lowered invert of a minimum energy culvert at
discharges less than 30% of QC , all non-cohesive sediments will be removed by 65% of QC .
• Wide three-dimensional inlet and outlet transitions must be provided for minimum energy
structures to perform well.
• Minimum energy culverts are less vulnerable to scour problems at the outlet.
• Theoretically, minimum energy culverts can be designed that will result in zero afflux.

Page 238

From the limited data available it appears that minimum energy waterways are worthy of
further investigation, and can be used under appropriate conditions to solve quite severe
flooding problems.

7.6 Channel improvements

Instead of improving the hydraulic efficiency of the bridge waterway, in some situations it
may be more productive to improve the channel, or to improve both the bridge and channel. It
should also be remembered that erosion arising from lateral movement of the channel is
perhaps the greatest cause of structural damage and bridge collapse (Brice, 1984; Trent and
Brown, 1984). Therefore channel stabilisation, as well as flow improvement, may be the
objective of channel improvement works (Sections 8.2.2 and 8.9.3). A few typical scenarios
are described below.

Reduction of abnormal stage
At sites that experience low Froude numbers, large normal depths or abnormal stages, perhaps
as a result of a backwater emanating from further downstream, channel improvements may
result in lower stages and an increased dischar ge (Section 7.2.1). Typical improvements to a
channel are the removal of bends, to shorten it and increase its gradient, and the removal of
obstructions to produce a uniform channel with a reduced Manning’s n value. If taken to the
ultimate the improvement works may result in a straight, artificial channel of uniform section,
which is effectively a new river channel with an increased conveyance. This may be desirable
from the hydraulic perspective, but environmental considerations must also be weighed
carefully. Care must also be taken to optimise the alignment of a new channel and to stabilise
it: rivers have sometimes displayed a tendency to seek out their old course during flood, while
the removal of bends can cause degradation (Fig. 8.8).

Improvement to the bridge approach
Ideally a bridge should be constructed perpendicular t o a stable river channel. However, river
morphology or economics may not allow this, so something has to be done to optimise a less
than ideal approach. If the channel meanders, shifts its course regularly or approaches the
bridge at an angle, river training works can be employed to establish a permanent channel.
This may be achieved by stabilising the banks using riprap, gabions, or any number of
proprietary protection systems. Under some circumstances it may be considered appropriate
to cut through meande rs to create a new channel with the ideal approach. This may affect
other reaches (Fig. 8.8), so caution is necessary, and environmental factors must also be
considered.

Dykes can be used to reduce the effects of skew ( Fig 3.8) while groynes (or spurs) can be
employed to reposition the flow in the channel (Figs 7.18 and 7.19). For example, if a bridge
is located on a bend it may be necessary to prevent the natural migration of the channel by
pushing the flow away

Page 239

Fig. 7.18 Use of groynes to control the flow: (a) retardance groynes angled upstream, resulting in
areas of relatively stationary water in the upstream corners with some siltation; (b) diverter
groynes angled downstream so that there is flow along the length of the groyne, deflecting
the current towards the centre of the channel.

Page 240

Fig. 7.19 Groynes on the River Loire, France, with a concrete revetment on the bank. The flow is
away from the camera. Note the size (the people on the groyne are barely visible) and the
siltation, especially on the opposite bank.

from the outside of the curve. Groynes can be used in conjunction with, or instead of, spur
dykes.

Improvement of the bridge opening ratio, M
The hydraulic performance of a bridge depends to a large extent upon the value of the
opening ratio, M=b/B. If the flow in the river channel is very wide (B) and shallow while the
opening is relatively narrow (b), the large contraction will result in poor hydraulic efficiency.
As an alternative to increasing b it is possible to use river training works to reduce B instead.
In the extreme, a narrower channel with new artificial banks could be created, but the
consequences of this would have to be carefully assessed. A less extreme solution may be to
use groynes to push the flow into the desired part of the channel (Figs 7.18 and 7.19). Novak
et al. (1990) suggested that longitudinal dykes (training walls) constructed within the river
channel roughly parallel to, but some distan ce from, the existing bank can be more
economical than groynes, and more effective if properly positioned.

Control of erosion
If there is a danger of bank erosion in the vicinity of the bridge, groynes can be used to give
some degree of protection, eithe r by repositioning the

Page 241

flow in the channel or by encouraging siltation in protected areas (Neill, 1973; Petersen,
1986). There are also many other protective measures that can be adopted, as listed in Section
8.9.3. However, since groynes have been mentioned above several times, their use is
described in more detail below.

7.6.1 Groynes (or spurs)

Groynes may be used to stabilise eroding streambanks in the vicinity of bridges or to
reposition the flow in the channel. Basically groynes (also called spurs) are long, narrow
embankments or walls that protrude from the bank into the river channel ( Fig. 7.18). They
may be used singly, but are normally used in groups because a single groyne can severely
disturb the flow, resulting in deep scour at its outer end. The type of groyne adopted depends
upon whether the primary function is to protect the existing bankline (perhaps by reducing
velocities), to encourage sedimentation, to re -establish a previous stream alignment, to create
a new stream alignment, or to narrow the channel by controlling the flow (Brown, 1984,
1985). These functions can be classified as either retardance or flow diversion (or a
combination of both).
Retardance groynes should normally be perpendicular to the primary flow direction or
point upstream so that they create a region of still water that is trapped in the corner of the
upstream face encouraging siltation (Fig. 7.19). Scour tends to be concentrated around the
nose of the groyne, so this must be adequately protected. In terms of construction, bank
protection groynes may be permeable or impermeable, the permeable variety being useful in
encouraging sedimentation when the river carries a lot of silt. Permeab le groynes can be
cheaply constructed from a double row of timber piles filled with trees and brushwood or
stone, or wood and wire fences that collect debris and silt. Permeabilities can be between 35%
(significant velocity reduction and flow control) and 80% (mild velocity reduction and flow
control): the greater the permeability the smaller the area and depth of scour downstream.
Retardance jacks (metal -wire frames or tetrahedrons) may be used in some parts of the world.
If the groynes are angled in the downstream direction the result will be to deflect or divert
flow along the groyne towards the centre of the channel, so protection may be required along
the full length of the upstream face. Groynes used to divert the flow have to be impermeable,
a stone embankment or solid wooden structure being a typical construction.
Brown (1985) analysed over one hundred field sites and gave some general guidelines
regarding the applicability of groynes.
• Groynes are not well suited to channels less than 46 m wide.
• They are not well suited to bends with a radius less than 107m.
• Most groynes are best suited to protecting channels with banks less than 6 m high, and are
particularly suited to protecting the lower part

Page 242

of the bank from toe scour and in reducing undermining and bank failure.
• Groynes can be cost effective and economical where irregular channel banks have to be
protected, especially if other protective measures require significant site preparation.
• They can be used in rivers with a wide variety of sediment types, but inclusion of the
sediment type in the design process is critical to achieving effectiveness.
• Groynes can be a hazard to recreational river use.
• A common mistake is to provide streambank protection too far upstream and not far enough
downstream.
The length of river bank protected by an individual groyne increases on the inside of a bend
and decreases on the outside, but a typical protected length for an individual groyne that
projects a distance, P, into the channel is roughly P to 2P both upstream and downstream.
With groups of four or more groynes the protected length increases. Thus an economic and
hydraulic decision has to be taken as to whether to use short, closely spaced groynes or longer,
more widely spaced groynes. Long groynes will project further into the main channel, where
the flow will be faster, so greater nose protection will be needed. Of course, the groynes
should never be so long as to cause hydraulic problems on the opposite bank, while the
passage of boats, ice and logs may also have to be considered. Brown suggested that the
projected length of impermeable groynes should be less than 15% of the bank full channel
width, with the equivalent length for permeable groynes being between 15% and 25% for
permeabilities of <35% and 80% respectively.
Farraday and Charlton (1983) gave the following equation as an indication of the spacing
required for a group of groynes:

Page 243

the aim of guiding the flow through the channel while protecting the banks. One suggestion is
that the tip of the most upstream diverter groyne should be at around 150° to the main flow,
each subsequent groyne having a smaller angle until the last one is perpendicular to the flow.
If the design stage is lower than the river bank, the minimum height for the groynes should be
1.0m below the design stage. If the design stage is above the riverbank then the groynes
should be built to bank level. If the groyne is intended to be above flood level then the
freeboard is typically between 0.5m and 1.0m (Brown, 1985). Embankment groynes typically
have side slopes of 1 in 3 and a crest width of about 2.0–2.5 m.

7.7 Examples

The first three examples use laboratory data so that the calculated and actual result [in
brackets] can be compared. Example 7.1 shows how easy the charts in Figs 7.5–7.9 are to
apply if QF is known, and illustrates the typical range of error. Examples 7.2 and 7.3 show
how the charts can be used even when little is known about the actual stage-discharge
relationship.

Example 7.1

A model 300mm span rectangular opening has Z=150mm, FN>0.25, QF=26.3 l/s and
Yu/Z=0.99 (channel flow). What reduction in upstream depth (for the same discharge) and
increase in discharge (for the same upstream depth) does R85 give?
From Fig. 7.7b, with Yu/Z=0.99, interpolating for R85, ∆Yu/Z=0.035 (i.e. 3.5%).
Thus ∆Yu=0.035×150=5.3mm [5.0mm].
Typical error in ∆Yu/Z is +0.8%, which gives an error in ∆Yu=+0.008× 150=+1.2mm.
From Fig. 7.8b, with Yu/Z=0.99, interpolating for R85, ∆Q /QF=0.075 (i.e. 7.5%).
Thus ∆Q=0.075×26.3=1.97l/s [1.76l/s].
Typical error in ∆Q /QF is +0.8%, which gives an error in ∆Q of +0.008× 26.3=+0.21 l/s.

Example 7.2

A model has a 200mm span arch, Z=100mm, FN>0.25 but QF is unknown, (a) When
Yu/Z=1.30, what increase in Q is possible for the same stage? (b) When Q=14.10 l/s, what
increase in Q is possible for the same stage?

Page 244

QF can be calculated from equation 2.8. Assume that Yu=2Z , the velocity head is negligible
and that Cd=0.57 (from Fig. 7.9 with Yu/Z=2.0).
Thus: Q2F=0.57 a W [2g(2Z−Z/2) ]1/2 giving Q2F=15.361/s. QF=Q2F/2=7.68 l/s [7.80 l/s].
(a) If Yu/Z=1.30, with R125 Fig. 7.8a gives ∆Q/QF=0.20 so ∆Q=0.20× 7.68=1.541/s
[1.481/s].
(b) If Q=14.101/s then Q/QF=1.83. From Fig 7.5, Yu/Z=1.80.
From Fig. 7.8a with R125 and Yu/Z=1.80, ∆Q /QF=0.34 so ∆Q=0.34× 7.68=2.611/s
[2.581/s].

Example 7.3

A model 250mm span rectangular opening has Z=125mm and FN < 0.25 (drowned orifice
flow). As a result of gauging it is known that Q=19.871/s when Yu=172mm, but nothing else
is known. When Q=27.62 l/s, what increase in discharge can be achieved using R25 and
R100?
Yu/Z=172/125=1.376. From Fig. 7.6 this is equivalent to Q/QF=1.4.
Thus QF=19.87/1.4=14.191/s [14.251/s].
When Q=27.621/s, Q/QF=27.62/14.19=1.946. From Fig. 7.6 this gives Yu/Z=1.95.
Thus Yu=1.95×125=244mm [242mm].
To calculate ∆H, use equation 2.9: Q=Cd aw[2g∆H]1/2, where Q=27.621/s,
Z/YU=125/244=0.51 and from Fig. 2.12 the provisional value of Cd is 0.71. Assume the
velocity head is negligible. Solving gives ∆H=79mm [80mm].
Thus ∆H/Z=79/125=0.63.
From Fig. 7.9d the value of Cd is 0.71, so the provisional value is accurate.
From Fig. 7.8d with ∆H/Z=0.63, R25 gives ∆Q/QF=0.080.
Thus ∆Q=0.080×14.19=1.141/s [1.15l/s].
Similarly, R100 gives ∆Q/QF=0.14. Thus ∆Q=0.14×14.19=1.99l/s [1.90l/s].

Example 7.4: minimum energy waterway

Produce an outline design of a minimum energy waterway capable of discharging 27m 3/s
given that at section 000 the length of the curved section (W0 ) is 60m, the bed level is 100m
above datum, and the depth of flow is 1.00m. The proposed opening width=4.00m and its
length is 15.00m. In the absence of site details it is not possible to draw a flow net so the
geometry of the transitions is taken from Co ttman and McKay (1990), and it is assumed that
the minimum energy waterway is symmetrical about both

Page 245

axes. Hence only the upstream transition is designed below, the downstream transition being
the mirror image.

Section 000: start of the inlet fan, WO=60 m
Assume a 90° sector of a circle with its centre located at the entrance of the opening (222)
and on the centreline of the bridge waterway ( Fig. 7.15).
If the length of the sector’s perimeter is W0=60 m then 2πr0/4=60 m and hence r0=38.198m
(i.e. r0=0.6366W0).
Thus the chainage of section 000 is 38.198m from section 222 measured along the
centreline.
At section 000 the total energy

Page 246

Chainage of section 111 from 222, r1=0.6366 W1=0.6366×15.600= 9.931m.

Intermediate section BBB: start of the transition curve to the bridge waterway
This section marks the end of the 90° sector and is defined as rB=1.20716, where b is the
width of the bridge opening. Thus rB=1.20716=1.2071× 4.00=4.828m, so this is the chainage
of the section measured along the centreline from 222.
The length of the curved perimeter of the sector WB=2πrB/4=(2π× 4.828/4)=7.584m (i.e.
0.9486).
If WB=7.584m then from equation 7.13, qCB=27/7.584=3.560 m3/s per metre.
From equation 7.17, ESCB=(3.560/1.705)2/3=1.634m.
Assuming the total energy line is constant at 101.010m then the elevation of the bed
Z1=(101.010–1.634)=99.376m above datum (i.e. 0.624m below initial bed level).
From equation 7.9, YCB=0.667×1.634=1.089m.
From equation 7.7, VCB=(9.81×1.089)1/2=3.268 m/s.
Check: F B=VCB/(gYCB)1/2=3.2687(9.81×1.089)1/2=1.00 as required.
Check: Q=WB YCB VCB=7.584×1.089×3.268=26.990 m3/s OK

Intermediate section CCC
This is the midpoint of the transition curve and is located on the 45° sector. longitudinal
centreline 0.9676 downstream of section 222, so this distance It is defined by rc=1.5466b. The
centre of the 45° sector is located on the must be subtracted from rc to obtain the centreline
chainage. Thus in this case rc=1.5466×4.00=6.186m so the chainage is (6.186–0.967×4.00)
=2.318m.
The length of the curved perimeter of the sector, WC=(27πrC /8)=(2π× 6.186/8)=4.858m (i.e.
1.215b).
The hydraulic calculations are as above, and are summarised in Table 7.3 .

Section 222: opening entrance
This is the end of the transition coinciding with the entrance to the waterway and chainage
0. The waterway is rectangular in section with parallel sides, and the width of the waterway is
b.

Here b =4.000m, so qc=27/4.00=6.750 m3/s per metre.
From equation 7.17, ESC2=(6.750/1.705)273=2.503m.
Assuming the total energy line is constant at 101.010 m then the elevation of the bed
Z2=(101.010–2.503)=98.507m above datum (i.e. 1.493m below initial bed level).

Table 7.3 Minimum energy waterway design calculations for Example 7.4

Section Chainage
(m)

Total
energy,
H (m)

Specific
energy,
ES (m)

Bed
level, Z
(m)

Width,
W (m)

Water
depth,
Y (m)

Velocity,
V (m/s)

Page 247

Froude
number,
F

Discharge
per m
width, q
(m3/s per
m)

000
AAA
111
BBB
CCC
222
333

38.198 101.010
19.099 101.010
9.931 101.010
4.828 101.010
2.318 101.010
0 101.010
−15.000 101.010

1.010 100.000
60.000
1.000
(1.010) 100.000
30.000 (1.000)
1.010 100.000
15.600
0.673
1.634
99.376
7.584
1.089
2.198
98.812
4.858
1.465
2.503
98.507 b=4.000
1.670
2.503
98.507 b=4.000
1.670

0.450
0.900
2.569
3.268
3.791
4.047
4.047

0.450
0.900
1.731
3.560
5.558
6.750
6.750

0.143
0.287
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

Values in brackets are assumed

Page 248

From equation 7.9, YC2=0.667×2.503=1.670m.
From equation 7.7, VC2=(9.81×1.670) 1/2=4.047 m/s.
Check: F 2=V C2/(gYC2 )1/2 =4.047/(9.81×1.670)1/2=1.00 as required.
Check: slope from 111 to 222=(100.000–98.507)79.931=1:6.7, as recommended in Section
7.5.2.

Section 333: opening exit
The waterway length is 15m, so this is chainage— 15.000m.
The hydraulic data are as at section 222.

Check length of transition
Length/ B≈38/60=0.63. A minimum value of 0.5 was suggested in the text as one ‘rule of
thumb’.

References

Apelt, C.J. (1981) Hydraulics of minimum energy culverts and bridge waterways, in Proceedings of a
Conference on Hydraulics in Civil Engineering, Sydney, 1981, pp. 39–43.
Bradley, J.N. (1978) Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways, 2nd edn, US Department of
Transportation/Federal Highways Administration, Washington DC.
Brice, J.C. (1984) Assessment of channel stability at bridge sites, in Transportation Research Record
950 , Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National
Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 163 –171.
Brown, S.A. (1984) Design guidelines for spur-type flow-control structures, in Transportation
Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research
Board/National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 193–201.
Brown, S.A. (1985) Streambank stabilisation measu res for highway stream crossings—executive
summary. Report no. FHWA/ED-84/099, Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Brown, S.A. and Recinos, S. (1988) Effect of spur dikes on bridge backwater: laboratory report.
Report no. FHWA-RD-88–270, Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Chow, V.T. (1981) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo.
Cottman, N.H. (1981) Experiences in the use of minimum and constant energy bridges and culverts, in
Proceedings of a Conference on Hydraulics in Civil Engineering, Sydney, 1981, pp. 44–48.
Cottman, N.H. and McKay, G.R. (1990) Bridges and culverts reduced in size and cost by use of
critical flow transitions. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Part 1, 88, June, 421–437.
Farraday, R.V. and Charlton, F.G. (1983) Hydraulic Factors in Bridge Design, Hydraulics Research
Station, Wallingford, England.

Page 249

Formica, G. (1955) Preliminary tests on head losses in channels due to cross -sectional changes.
L’Energia ellectrica, 32(7), 554–568.
French, J.L. (1969) Nonenlarged box culvert entrances. Proceedings of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, Journal of the Hydraulics Division, 95(HY6), 2115 –2137.
French, R.H. (1986) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.
Griffiths, W.T. (1978) Problems Associated with Minimum Energy Design. Workshop on minimum
energy design of culverts and bridge waterways, Melbourne, December 1978, Australian Road
Research Board Publication (18pp).
Hamill, L. (1993) A guide to the hydraulic analysis of single -span arch bridges. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 98, March, 1–11.
Hamill, L. (1997) Improved flow through bridge waterways by entrance rounding. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 121, March, 7–21.
Hamill, L. and McInally, G.A. (1990) The hydraulic performance of two arch bridges during flood.
Municipal Engineer, 7, October, 241 –256.
Hemphill, R.W. and Bramley, M.E. (1989) Protection of River and Canal Banks, CIRIA/Butterworths,
London.
Highway Research Board, (1970) Scour at bridge waterways. National Cooperative Highways
Research Program, Synthesis of Highway Practice 5, Highway Research Board, Washington DC.
Kindsvater, C.E. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Tranquil flow through open -channel constrictions.
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 955–992.
Kindsvater, C.E., Carter, R.W. and Tracy, H.J. (1953) Computatio n of Peak Discharge at
Contractions. Circular 284, United States Geological Survey, Washington DC.
Li, R.M.MacArthur, R., and Cotton, G. (1989) Sizing riprap for the protection of approach
embankments and spur dikes and limiting the depth of scour at bridge piers and abutments. Report
no. FHWA-AZ89–260 II, Arizona Department of Transport, Phoenix.
Loveless, J.H. (1984) A comparison of the performance of standard and novel culvert designs
including the effects of sedimentation, in Channel and Channel Control Structures (ed.
K.V.H.Smith), Proceedings of 1st International Conference on Hydraulic Design in Water
Resources Engineering: Channel and Channel Control Structures, Computational Mechanics Centre,
Southampton, pp. 183 –193.
Matthai, H.F. (1967) Measurement of peak discharge at width contractions by indirect methods, in
Techniques of Water Resource Investigations of the United States Geological Survey, Ch. A4, Book
3, Applications of Hydraulics, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC.
Mazumder, S.K. and Ahuja, K.C. (1978) Optimum length of contracting transitions in open channel
subcritical flow. Journal of the Institution of Engineers (India), Civil Engineering Division, 58,
March, 218–223.
McKay, G.R. (1970) Pavement drainage. Proceedings of the 5th Conference, Australian Road
Research Board, Canberra, 5(4), pp. 305 –326.

Page 250

McKay, G.R. (1978) Design principles of minimum energy waterways. Workshop on minimum
energy design of culverts and bridge waterways, Melbourne, December 1978, Austra lian Road
Research Board Publication.
Neill, C.R. (ed.) (1973) Guide to Bridge Hydraulics, Roads and Transportation Association of Canada,
University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Novak, P., Moffat, A.I.B., Nalluri, C. and Narayanan, R. (1990) Hydraulic Structures, Unwin Hyman,
London.
Petersen, M.S. (1986) River Engineering, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Richardson, E.V. and Simons, D.B. (1984) Use of spurs and guidebanks for highway crossings, in
Transportation Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2,
Transportation Research Board/National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 184 –193.
Richardson, E.V, Simons, D.B. and Julien, P.Y. (1990) Highways in the river environment. Report no
FHWA -HI-90–016, National Highways Institute/Federal Highways Administration, McLean, VA.
Ruddock, E. (1979) Arch Bridges and Their Builders, 1735–1835, Cambridge University Press.
Schneible, D.E. (1966) Field observations on the performance of spur dykes at bridges. ACSE
Transportation Enginee ring Conference, Philadelphia, PA, 17–21 October 1966.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1954) Backwater effects of open channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, separate 415.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Backwater effects of open channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120 , 993–1018.
Trent, R.E. and Brown, S.A. (1984) An overview of factors affecting river stability, in Transportation
Research Record 950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research
Board/National Research Council, Washington DC, pp. 156–163.

