Page 61

3
Factors that affect the hydraulic performance of a
bridge

3.1 Introduction

This chapter reviews the main factors that affect the hydraulic performance of a bridge,
explains why they are important, and illustrates their effect. Many of these variables are
related to the geometry of the structure and are summarised in Fig. 3.1. It is these factors in
combination with the types of flow encountered (as described in Chapter 2 ) that give each
bridge its own unique hydraulic characteristics.
Some of the factors described below are quite difficult to estimate numerically with any
degree of accuracy. However, this fact should not necessarily deter anyone from starting an
analysis. Sometimes it is better to have an inaccurate estimate of (say) the afflux that occurs at
a particular discharge than no estimate at all. The important thing is to realise that the estimate
is inaccurate so that the appropriate allowances can be made. Possibly the estimate can be
refined at a later date whe n better field data become available. If such data already exist, then
provided care is taken to prove and verify the mathematical models adopted in the analysis,
the solutions obtained can be surprisingly robust.

3.2 The bridge opening ratio, M

The bridge opening ratio (M) is basically a measure of the severity of the constriction (Fig.
3.1a ). In channel flow this is perhaps the most important of all the variables: the smaller the
opening, the greater the obstacle to flow, the greater the afflux, and the smaller the discharge
through the opening for a given stage. However, once the waterway opening is submerged M
ceases to be important since the dimensions of the opening and the degree of submergence of
the waterway determine the stage-discharge relationship (Section 2.5).
With channel flow, the flow in the middle of the river can go straight through a centrally
located bridge opening whereas the flow in the sides of the channel or on the floodplains will
have to bend inwards and contract to

Page 62

Fig. 3.1 Summary of the principal hydraulic variables affecting the hydraulic performance of a bridge:
(a) bridge opening ratio, M; (b) Froude number, F; (c) waterway length/span, L/b; (d)
entrance rounding; (e) eccentricity, e; (f) skew, ø; (g) depth of flow, YN/Z; (h) shape of
opening.

pass through. The opening ratio represents the ratio of flow that can pass straight through the
bridge opening without having to contract, q, to the total flow in the river, Q (Kindsvater et al.,
1953; Kindsvater and Carter, 1955, Tracy and Carter , 1955; Bradley 1978), so:

Page 63

If A N2=a and A N1=A then

If both the opening and the channel are rectangular, so a=b×YN, and A =B×YN then

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

At high flood stages in real, compound river channels the depth of flow and velocity vary
greatly across the width of the channel so neither equation 3.3 nor 3.4 adequately describes M.
Under these conditions a popular way to calculate M is to split the channel into subsections
wherever there is a large change in hydraulic radius (changes in roughness are not important
unless the flow is shallow) and then calculate the hydraulic conveyances. Provided all parts of
the channel (i.e. the main channel and

floodplains) have the same longitudinal energy (friction) gradient, S F, the opening ratio
becomes

Page 64

(3.5)

where K b is the conveyance of that part of the approach channel equivalent to the opening
width (b) projected upstream to section 1 and K is the conveyance of the whole channel at
section 1. Conveyance is defined in terms of the Manning equation (equation 2.7) so, in
metric units, for any channel or channel subsection (denoted by subscript i below) its
conveyance is

evaluated directly using equation 3.1 or 3.5 or, alternatively, by assuming a rectangular
upstream channel with flow at the normal depth an expression can be developed from
equation 3.3 (Biery and Delleur, 1962). For a semicircular opening of radius r with the arches
springing from bed level, with a depth in the waterway of Ys above the springs of the arch (Fig.
3.2a ), working in radians:

Page 65

For a semicircular arch with the springline above the bed, the area of the flow beneath the
springs should be added to the numerator (Fig. 3.2b). With segmental arches the centre of
curvature of the arch, O, is at some depth, d, below spring level (Fig. 3.2c). If the height of the
water surface above the centre of curvature is h, then for a segmental arch with the springline
at bed level, working in radians:

(3.7)

As before, if the springline is above the bed (Fig. 3.2d) then the area of the flow beneath the
springs should be added to the numerator. Example 3.1 illustrates the use of the equation.
Instead of calculating the area of flow, a practical alternative is to produce a scale drawing
of the opening and measure the area using a planimeter or a digitiser. This is often the easiest
way with elliptical openings or arches that have a unique shape.

(3.8)

Fig. 3.2 Definition of the variables needed to calculate the area of flow through some common types
of arched waterway: (a) semicircular arch with springs at bed level; (b) semicircular arch
with springs above bed level; (c) segmental arch with springs at bed level; (d) segmental
arch with springs above bed level.

Page 66

In natural river channels the value of M is not constant and changes with stage (Fig. 3.3).
As the stage rises, the capacity of the main channel will be exceeded and flow will commence
on the floodplains. When this happens the values of q, Kb and a may remain relatively
constant while Q, K and A continue to increase, resulting in a change in gradient of the stage -
M curve. With an arch bridge there is an added complexity because the width of the opening
also varies with stage so b is not constant. Figures 3.3 and 3.11 can be compared to see the
difference in M that results from applying equations 3.1 and 3.8 respectively. The latter uses a
simpler definition of M, and assumes that the channel has a constant width of 5.5m and that
there is no overbank flow prior to the submergence of the opening.
From the comments above it wi ll be apparent that the opening ratio is quite difficult to
evaluate accurately. Often the field data required are unavailable. For an accurate estimate it
is important that the person doing the calculations observes a flood at the site in question.
Unfortunately this rarely happens. For example, at Canns Mill the channel is compound in
nature (Fig. 3.3a ) with a hedgebank and then pasture on the left, and a hedge or barbed wire
fence bordering open pasture on the right. There is flow over both floodplains during flood,
with ultimately all of the flow passing through the bridge opening (Fig. 2.1). However, during
a 15m3/s flood, at about 10 m and 15 m from the left and right banks the water on the
floodplains is stagnant and does not contribute to flow (this may also happen where there are
levees, as in Fig. 8.16). If this is ignored when using equations 3.3 and 3.4 the value of M
obtained is far too small: b/B=0.08 and a/A=0.14. With zero flow on parts of the floodplains
SF cannot be the same as in the main channel, so equations 3.5 and 3.6 are not appropriate.
Thus equation 3.1 is the only reliable method of obtaining M and indicates that the true value
is around 0.55 ( Fig. 3.3b and Example 3.3).
Forty-seven undergraduate students at the University of Plymouth were given the task of
calculating the opening ratio at Canns M ill. All conducted a technically correct analysis, but
there was a very large range of answers and almost all produced values that were too small.
This was mainly a consequence of never having seen the site or having had the opportunity to
study the flow. It serves as a reminder that in many cases only a rough estimate of M can be
obtained, which has repercussions for the accuracy of any subsequent calculations.
In open channel flow the opening ratio is very important. With a wide opening (large M)
the flow in the river is barely affected. If the opening is narrow compared with the river (small
M), the flow entering the waterway will have a significant transverse velocity resulting in a
relatively narrow live stream at the vena contracta ( Fig. 2.2b) and a small coefficient of
contraction, CC (and a small coefficient of discharge, C, since friction losses are small and C
is basically a coefficient of contraction). Thus a fundamental relationship exists between M
and CC or C in open channel flow, as illustrated by the base curves of Fig. 4.3a . It is apparent
from the diagram that

Page 67

Fig 3.3 Canns Mills Bridge, Devon: (a) approximate cross -section 1; (b) varition of the opening ratio,
M, with stage. (Reproduced by permission of the Institution of Civil Engineers)

Page 68

the value of M can change C' and C and hence the discharge through the waterway by up to
30%.
The opening ratio is also instrumental in determining the type of flow at a particular site.
Waterways that are narrow and have a small opening ratio are more likely to experience
supercritical flow in either the opening or the downstream channel (flow types 5 and 6 in Fig.
2.6). A narrow opening also makes it more likely that the capacity of the opening will be less
than the floods that occur, so increasing the possibility of flooding upstream and/or that the
bridge will operate with the waterway submerged (flow types 1 to 3).
The opening ratio (M=q/Q) is also referred to as the bridge opening ratio or the channel
opening ratio. In this book only equations 3.1 –3.8 are used to define and evaluate the opening
ratio, so a value of 1.0 always means that the flow is unobstructed. Note that the contraction
ratio, the channel contraction ratio or the blockage ratio (often symbolised by m) is usually
defined as (1−q/Q) or (1−b/B). With this definition a value of zero means that the bridge has
no effect on the flow, while a value above zero gives an indicat ion of the quantity of flow that
cannot pass unimpeded through the opening: that is, the amount that flows in from the sides of
the channel. Both of these alternative definitions are in common usage, so whenever a value is
quoted in other literature it is essential to check which has been adopted.

3.3 Froude number (F), subcritical and supercritical flow

Whether or not the flow is subcritical or supercritical is instrumental in determining the
hydraulic performance of a bridge and the type of flow that wi ll be encountered (Section 2.4).
In open channel flow F also affects the discharge through the bridge opening: for example,
compared with the standard value of F=0.5 i n Fig. 4.3b, when F=0.2 there is roughly a 6%
decrease in Q and when F=0.8 there is about a 10% increase. This relationship is independent
of the opening ratio, M.
Flow at the critical depth (F=1.0) can be used to optimise the performance of a waterway,
as described in Section 7.5 , so a knowledge of the critical (or limiting) contraction that will
cause this condition is important. A waterway narrower than the critical contraction may
result in an unexpectedly large afflux due to the phenomenon known as choking. This is
explained below.

The Froude number of the flow in a particular channel depends upon the velocity and depth,
thus:

3.3.1 Froude number

Page 69

where V is a characteristic velocity of flow (m/s) and Y is a characteristic depth (m). F itself is
dimensionless. If F=1, the flow is in the critial state. If F<1 the flow is subcritical, and if F>1
it is supercritical. The denominator of the Froude number is the celerity of an elementary
gravity wave in shallow water. The significance of this is that in subcritical flow a gravity
wave (or disturbance to the flow) can propagate upstream ((gY)1/2>V) so that the upstream
reach is in hydraulic communication with the downstream reach. Therefore with subcritical
flow through a bridge the control is downstream of the constriction and this would be the
starting point for a backwater analysis, and the calculations would progress in an upstream
direction. In supercritical flow a gravity wave cannot propagate upstream because V>(gY)1/2
so the effect of any disturbance is swept downstream. Consequently the upstream reach is not
in hydraulic communication with that downstream. With supercritical flow the control is
upstream so the calculations for the backwater analysis proceed in a downstream direction.
The Froude number is more important than just being an indicator of where a backwater
analysis should begin. The Froude number of the downstream control section (section 4 in Fig.
2.2) gives an indication of the ease with which water can flow away from the constriction. For
example, a low Froude number of 0.1 might indicate a deep, slow flow with the possibility of
an abnormal stage at the bridge site. The relatively low velocities would probably result in a
correspondingly small afflux. If the opening submerges, then drowned orifice flow might be
expected. On the other hand, a high Froude number of 0.8 would suggest a very steep channel
with high flow velocities, so the afflux might be relatively large. There would also be the
likelihood of supercritical flow in the opening o r downstream channel, with it being less likely
that the opening would submerge. If it did, sluice gate flow would be more likely than
drowned orifice flow. In model tests Hamill (1997) found that sluice gate flow usually
occurred when F N>0.25.
The importance of the Froude number in determining the type of flow encountered at a
bridge site was investigated using a hydraulic model of Canns Mill Bridge (see Section 2.6).
The study was conducted in a tilting laboratory channel. The model bridge was tested under a
wide range of conditions, not just those actually encountered at the prototype site, in order to
determine how an identical bridge would perform hydraulically at a different location. Some
of the results are shown in Fig. 3.4, which is simplified and for illustration only: it should not
be used for design purposes.
The vertica l scale of Fig. 3.4 is the dimensionless ratio of the normal depth at section 4 to
the arch height, YN/Z . The horizontal scale is the dimensionless normal depth Froude number,
F N, at section 4. The contours on the diagram represent the dimensionless ratio of upstream
depth at section 1 to the normal depth: that is, Yu/YN. This is effectively a measure of the
afflux, a contour value of 1.0 meaning that there is no afflux ; a contour value of 2.0 means
that the afflux is equal to the normal depth. From the diagram it is easy to see that for a given
stage (YN/Z) the contour values

Page 70

Fig. 3.4 Illustration of the variation in performance of a bridge with depth of flow and Froude number
based on a 1:15 scale hydraulic model of Canns Mill. The vertical scale (Y N/ Z) represents
normal depth as a proportion of the arch height. The horizontal scale is the normal depth
Froude number (FN). The contours of Yu /YN show the upstream depth as a proportion of
normal depth. For a given stage (Y N/Z) it is apparent that the contour values, which are
equivalent to the afflux, increase with increasing FN . The type of flow experienced is also
indicated.

increase from left to right, showing that a fflux increases with increasing Froude number. The
diagram is also marked to show the types of flow experienced under different conditions.
With low Froude numbers, channel flow and drowned orifice flow predominate (flow types 4
and 1 in Fig. 2.6). There is no possibility of critical depth flow occurring in the opening or
downstream channel (flow types 5 and 6) until the value of FN approaches 0.5. At higher
Froude numbers channel flow (types 4 to 6) and sluice gate flow ( type 3) are possible.

Page 71

Figure 3.4 has been included not just to illustrate the importance of the Froude number in
determining the type of flow that occurs at a particular site, but also to emphasise once again
that identical bridges can have a very different hydraulic performance at different sites.
Consequently the types of flow that will occur at any given site must be identified before
trying to assess the afflux, head loss and energy loss. It should also be appreciated that Fig.
3.4 represents only one opening ratio, and that changing this would also affect the type of
flow experienced.
The Froude number is another parameter that at first appears easy to calculate, but which in
practice involves some considerable margin for error. Indeed, for anything other than a
rectangular channel the value of F may be unreliable. For instance, determining accurately the
value of the characteristic hydraulic depth (Y) can be difficult in natural channels where the
depth varies considerably. Normally Y is taken as the mean depth (YM), which is the flow area
(A) divided by the width of the top (free) water surface (B T) so YM=A/BT (Fig 3.1b).Thus

the stage increases. Consequently YM3 and F3 at first become numerically dubious, then
meaningless. The same problem is encountered when trying to calculate the critical depth (YC )
in an opening. For a rectangular opening:

Page 72

Page 73

3.3.2 The limiting or critical contraction

If a wide waterway opening is made progressively narrower, there is a limiting width at which
the flow in the opening will no longer be subcritical but critical. This is the limiting or critical
contraction. Henderson (1966) considered the limiting contraction required to cause flow at
the critical depth between the piers of a bridge, and presented two equations that relate the
limiting opening ratio (ML) to the Froude number (F or FL) in the channel. These equations
are generally used in connection with the flow between bridge piers, but can be cautiously
applied to single -span openings. Both assume that the velocity is uniform across section 3
between the piers, and that this is where the most contracted section is located and where
critical flow first occurs (F 3=1.0). The first equation assumes that the specific energy at
section 1 equals that at section 3. The limiting bridge opening ratio, M L=b/B , is given by

where F 1 is the Froude number at section 1. This equation is attributed to Yarnell (1934), who
used it to distinguish between unchoked flow and choked flow (see Sections 3.3.3 and 5.4.1).
Chow (1981) presented basically the same equation but equated the energy at section 3
between the piers to that at section 4 while introducing -ε- to represent the proportion of
energy recovered, so:

(3.13)

For convenience, equations 3.14 and 3.15 have been plotted as Fig. 3.5 so it is a simple
matter to obtain t he limiting opening ratio. Although this is derived in terms of b/B above,
because rectangular cross -sections are assumed, generally this is not a very good way of
defining M. Usually the area, conveyance or discharge ratio produces a more accurate result.
The significance of critical flow, or supercritical flow, occurring in the waterway is that the
methods used to calculate the afflux or backwater in

Page 74

Fig. 3.5 Relationship between the limiting bridge opening ratio (ML) and the Froude number at either
section 1 or 4 when the flow at the contracted section is at the critical depth (YC) with
F3=1.0. The proportion of energy recovered from section 3 to 4 is represented by ε.

Page 75

subcritical flow are no longer appropriate, so a different technique must be adopted (e.g.
Section 4.3.5). In addition, there may be a substantial increase in the afflux because a higher
local value of specific energy is needed to enable the transition from subcritical to
supercritical flow to occur. This is referred to as chok ing.

3.3.3 Choking of a bridge waterway

If the flow through a bridge waterway chokes this will result in an increase in the upstream
water level that is additional to the afflux caused by the energy loss. The concept of a choke
has to be explained in terms of specific energy, ES, which is the energy calculated above bed
level, so

Page 76

Fig. 3.6 Illustration of choking caused by the need for a local increase in specific energy, ES. The
narrowing of a channel by a constriction leads to an increase in q (from 0.500 m2 /s to 1.734
m2 /s in this example). If the constriction is narrower than this the appropriate ES curve
cannot be reached by dropping vertically from G, necessating an increase in ES and depth,
Y. For example, starting from G the q=2.500 m 2/s curve is inaccessible without an increase
in ES.

is progressively reduced then a point will be reached where the flow in the opening is at the
critical depth, which is represented by the movement G to E on the Y-ES diagram. This is not
a problem because the flow can accelerate smoothly from subcritical to critical while the
specific energy

remains constant. This represents the limiting contraction defined by equation 3.13:

Page 77

The same result can be obtained from Fig. 3.5 with F 4=F 1=0.160.
Thus b=2.884m is the limiting contraction, which is why E is vertically below G. However,
consider wha t happens if b is further reduced, say to 2.000 m so q=2.500 m3/s per m. A line
drawn vertically down from G now fails to intercept this Y-ES curve indicating that this flow
condition is not possible with ES=1.0m. In order to intercept the q=2.500m3/s per m line a
shift to the right is necessary, which means that an increase in specific energy must occur.
This can be accomplished only by an increase in the upstream depth, which is called choking.
A phenomenon such as choking is logical because if a channel is progressively narrowed
there must be some limit at which the water level upstream is affected, irrespective of the fact
that critical or supercritical flow occurs.
Choking is significant because it can result in the afflux being larger than expected. M ost
methods of calculating afflux are valid only when the flow is subcritical, and certainly do not
allow for choking. In many ways afflux and choking are similar: the afflux provides the
additional head necessary to overcome energy losses in subcritical flow through a constriction,
while choking represents the additional head required to increase the specific energy and
accelerate the flow through a constriction in the critical or supercritical condition. Choking is
also significant when a waterway is deliberately designed to operate at the critical depth (e.g.
see Section 7.5).
The occurrence of choking is not always as easy to predict as the example above may
sugges t. No allowance was made for a non-uniform distribution of velocity or energy losses;
Fig 3.5 illustrates how this alone can throw doubt upon the value of the critical contraction.
Then there is always the problem of debris caught on the piers or abutments altering the flow
condition.

3.4 Ratio of waterway length to span, L/b

In general, long waterways are more efficient than short ones, so the length of the opening is
another factor that affects the hydraulic performance of a

Page 78

bridge. This is assessed in terms of the length ratio (L/b), which is the ratio of the waterway
length between the upstream and downstream faces of the constriction, L, to the width or span
of the opening, b. With an arch bridge the bottom width is usually adopted so that L/b remains
a constant for a particular structure (Fig. 3.1c). To be classed as a bridge this ratio should be
less than 1.0, waterways with larger values being classed as culverts. However, the distinction
is rather arbitrary.
Kindsvater and Carter (1955) showed that reducing the waterway length from L/b=1 to
L/b=0.15 can decrease the discharge through a waterway by as much as 15%. Thus the ratio
L/b appears in Fig. 4.3a (for example) in recognition of the fact that the waterway length is
one of the more important variables controlling the hydraulic performance of a bridge.
The reason why long waterways are more efficient is that the contraction and subsequent
expansion of the flow is more controlled in a long waterway, so the energy loss is reduced.
This can be explained as follows. As the flow enters the opening it contracts and forms a vena
contracta. With a short waterway the contraction will continue unsuppressed into the
downstream channel (as in Fig. 2.2b). The expansion between the vena contracta and section
4 is then relatively large, and takes place in a region with an adverse (positive) pressure
gradient, so there is a large energy loss. With a long waterway the vena contracta will be
inside the opening, and the flow will have expanded to the full width of the waterway before
emerging into the downstream channel (Fig. 3.1c). This effectively means that the water
between the separation boundary of the live stream and the abutment wall (shown cross-
hatched) is trapped. It cannot be replaced from downstream, but it will be entrained by the jet
and removed. Thus the depth of water in this zone is less than that in the jet, and the
consequent negative pressure gradient aids the expansion of the jet and reduces the energy
loss. When the jet leaves the opening it is wider than it would otherwise have been , so the
expansion and energy loss between sections 3 and 4 are reduced. The double expansion still
results in an energy loss, but it is smaller than for a short waterway so there is an overall
improvement in hydraulic performance.
The length ratio is one of the few variables that is easy to calculate and which has a
constant value once a bridge has been built, unlike the opening ratio and Froude number,
which vary with river stage.

3.5 Entrance Founding

One method of improving the hydraulic efficiency of a waterway opening is to round the
upstream edges so that the geometry of its entrance more closely resembles the shape of the
boundary streamlines (Fig. 3.1d). Entrance rounding reduces the contraction of the live stream
and increases the width of the vena contracta, and hence increases the coefficient of discharge,
such as Cd in equations 2.8 and 2.9. Since the discharge for a given

Page 79

stage is directly prop ortional to Cd, this means that the bridge can pass larger floods for the
same water level.
Kindsvater et al. (1953) and Kindsvater and Carter (1955) showed that as the relative radius
of curvature, r/b, increases so the improvement in the hydraulic performance of a constriction
operating with open channel flow increases, but at a diminishing rate until a maximum value
is reached. The maximum value corresponds to a value of the coefficient of contraction (CC)
approaching unity. Under these conditions the difference between CC and C (i.e. the
coefficient of discharge in open channel flow) represents the boundary friction loss.
Predictably, the greatest benefit arises with narrow openings (small M). For example, with
r/b=0.14 and M=0.2 the improvement in C, and hence Q, is about 20% (Fig. 4.3c). This
probably represents about the maximum improvement that can be gained from entrance
rounding in channel flow. It should be appreciated that improvements on this scale are not
automatic: the type of flow, Froude number and bridge geometry all influence the value, and
in most cases it will be much less than 20%. Hamill (1997) found that in channel flow the
increase in discharge o r reduction in afflux that could be obtained through entrance rounding
was usually less than 5%, although much larger improvements that increased with the degree
of submergence were obtained once the opening had drowned ( Section 7.2.2).
An alternative to using a rounded entrance is to use a chamfer (bevel), which has the
advantage that it is easier to construct. In channel flow this virtually amounts to angled
wingwalls. The degree of chamfer is indicated by the angle (δ) and its length measured as w/b
(Fig. 3.1d). When the radius of a rounded entrance is small a chamfer may be as effective, but
rounding becomes superior as the radius increases. Kindsvater et al. (1953) found that with
w/b=0.12 and M=0.2 a 30° chamfer used with channel flow resulted in a maximum 9%
increase in discharge, a 45° chamfer 15%, and a 60° chamfer 29% (Fig. 4.3 d to f). The
improvement is smaller with larger M values, but the 60° chamfer/wingwall configuration is
always best since this minimises the transverse contraction.
Kindsvater et al. (1953) found that rounding the downstream corners had a negligible effect
in laboratory tests. Hamill (1997) studied the contraction from the soffit of rectangular and
arched openings and concluded that this was where rounding or a chamfer was most effective,
since there is usually a large vertical contraction from the deck of a bridge, particularly in
sluice gate flow. This type of deck rounding is apparent in Fig. 1.1. Entrance rounding is
considered in more detail in Chapter 7, along with other ways to improve hydraulic
pe rformance.

3.6 Eccentricity, e

If a bridge opening is eccentrically located in the river channel, as shown in Fig. 3.1e, this can
affect the flow through the constriction. To take an extreme

Page 80

example, if X a=0 there is no contraction on that side of the channel so the flow on the left
bank can pass through the constriction unimpeded. This would increase the width of the live
stream at the vena contracta (Fig. 2.2b) and increase the coefficient of discharge. The reverse
is also true. If one abutment is very long (e.g. Xc in Fig. 3.1e), so that the water has to flow
along it prior to passing through the opening, the resulting contraction may be very large,
reducing the width of the live stream and decreasing the coefficient of discharge. One
consequence of this may be an increased likelihood of supercritical flow in the waterway (Fig.
2.8). Another may be that a very large eddy will form in the downstream separation zone.
The amount of eccentricity can be quantified as e=Xa/Xc (Fig. 3.1e), but it is best defined in
terms of the discharge or conveyances of the approach section, so e=Qa/Qc or e=Ka /Kc where
the numerator is always the smaller of the two values so e<1.0 (Kindsvater and Carter, 1955;
Matthai, 1967; Bradley, 1978). Generally if e is larger than 0.12–0.20 the effect of the
eccentricity on the coefficient of discharge can be ignored. Even with smaller values the
resulting reduction in discharge will probably be less than 5% (Table 4.1 ).

3.7 Skew, ø

A simple definition of skew is shown in Fig. 3.If. In this example the longitudinal centreline
of the bridge and its approach embankments is at an angle ø to the banks of the channel and
the direction of flow, although the waterway opening itself is parallel to the flow. For a
normal or perpendicular crossing ø=0°. However, Fig. 3.7 illustrates that there are three
possible types of skew in addition to a normal crossing:
• normal crossing—embankments perpendicular to the flow, waterway parallel to the flow;
• skew 1—embankments skewed to the flow, waterway parallel to the flow;
• skew 2—embankments skewed to the flow, waterway skewed to the flow;
• skew 3—embankments perpendicular to the flow, waterway skewed to the flow.
Of these skew 3 is unusual, although not unknown: it may occur unintenti onally if the river
shifts its course after the bridge has been constructed, but will not be considered further. Both
skew 1 and 2 are common and will be considered in some detail. Note that the USGS method
of analysis in Section 4.2 treats skew in a slightly different way from that described here.
Skew has many effects, some of which are not immediately obvious. The hydraulic
consequences of skew 1 and 2 compared with a normal crossing are summarised below and
then explained fully.

Page 81

Fig. 3.7 Compari son of normal and skewed crossings and the definition of skew types and the skew
angle ø: (a) normal crossing; (b) type 1 skew with abutments parallel to the flow; (c) type 2
skew with abutments at 90° to the approach embankments; (d) type 3 skew with the
abutments at an angle ø to both the flow and approach embankments. Note that with skew
type 2 the unobstructed opening width normal to the flow (b#) is reduced compared with
type 1.

Page 82

Fig. 3.8 A skewed crossing illustrating: (a) the location of the maximum afflux; (b) the higher water
level on the right bank where the water is ‘trapped’ in the corner; (c) the possible use of a
relief opening to reduce the raised water level; (d) the possible use of a dyke to reduce the
effect of skew and aid flow through the opening, (e) the projection of the skewed opening
upstream to section 1 and the discharge Qa, Qb and Qc in the channel subsections.

• The water levels recorded at the two upstream corners of the channel will be different, being
higher on the side where the water is ‘trapped’, such as in the right corner of Fig. 3.8.
• In channel flow there is a reduction in the effective width of the waterway with an
associated change in the opening ratio (M) and in hydraulic performance.
• Once the waterway is submerged there is a change in hydraulic performance, and the flow
emerging from the opening is angled towards one bank.

Page 83

3.7.1 Transverse variation of water level

In Fig. 3.8 the water flowing along the right -hand boundary floodplain is trapped in the corner
of the channel against the upstream face of the bridge or embankment, and may have to flow
backwards to escape. This means that the water in this region is effectively static and, owing
to the recovery of the velocity head, the depth is larger than in th e centre of the channel. On
the left bank the flow along the floodplain is deflected towards the centre by the embankment,
so it accelerates smoothly into the opening while experiencing a reduction in depth as the
velocity head increases. Thus there is a general slope of the water surface from right to left.
Because of the ‘superelevation’ of the flow, when a skewed opening first submerges it will
do so on the side where the water is trapped in the corner between the upstream face and the
channel boundary. It is not unusual for one side of the opening to be submerged while the
other side is still operating in open channel flow. Thus the transition between the two may
take place over a larger range of Yu/Z than for a normal crossing.
The river is most likely to burst its banks in the corner of the channel where the water
surface is highest. However, unless the channel is wide, steep and the velocity head relatively
large the cross -fall may not be particularly significant. Nevertheless, the hydraulic
performance of a skewed crossing may be improved by constructing an embankment or dyke
across the ‘troublesome’ floodplain to deflect the flow into the opening. This dyke is more or
less the mirror image of the br idge embankment on the opposite floodplain. An alternative is
to provide a relief opening through the embankment ( Fig. 3.8). An opening (e.g. a pipe) may
also be needed at this location if a dyke is contructed, so that the area between the dyke and
the bridge embankment can drain if flooded.

3.7.2 Reduction in width

In Figs 3.7 and 3.8 the opening width (b) is measured perpendicular to the direction of flow,
and it is this width that is projected upstream to section 1, whereas bS is the skewed width
between the abutments or piers measured along the longitudinal centreline of the highway
embankments (except for skew 3). To aid the comparison of the waterway size and ease of
flow through the opening, Fig. 3.7 is drawn so that the upstream corners of the left-hand
abutments align.
It is generally assumed that skew reduces the efficiency of a waterway, but the true effect is
often obscured by confusion regarding the effective ‘span’. For example, consider skew 1A in
Fig. 3.7 where b=10.0m, as for the normal crossing. The skew angle ø=45° so bS=b/cos
45°=14.1 m. The clear dist ance between the abutments has increased, so there is a
corresponding increase in discharge capacity (although not in direct proportion to bS), as
shown in Fig. 3.9a. Conversely, for skew 1B with ø=45° and bS=10m the

Page 84

Fig. 3.9 Illustration of the effect of type 1 skew on the stage-discharge curve of model bridges at a
slope of 1:50. For the normal bridge b= bS=200 mm. With ø=45°, skew 1A has b=200 mm
and bS=283 mm; skew 1B has bS =200 mm and b=141 mm. (a) Rectangular opening; (b)
arched opening.

projected width perpendicular to the flow is b=bs cos 45°=7.1 m, which represents a reduction
of 29% compared with the 10m wide normal crossing. As a result, the waterway has a
reduced discharge capability ( Fig. 3.9a). With skew type 2B there is also a marked reduction
in the unobstructed

Page 85

span (b#) between the abutments parallel to the flow. This is one reason why skewed
waterways are generally assumed to be inefficient. However, provided the appropriate
allowances are made, such as increasing bS slightly and considering the possibility of scour
near the points of the abutments, there is no real need to avoid skewed crossings (particularly
with ø<20°). Thus the question arises: what size of skewed opening actually gives the same
performace as a normal crossing?
Fo r skew 1 waterways Bradley (1978) presented a chart (Fig. 4.24) that showed the skewed
width of opening ( bS) required to produce the same backwater as a normal crossing of width b.
For example, if b=10 m, ø= 45° and M=0.45 then from the chart bS cos 45°/b=0.87, giving
bS= 12.3 m. This is between the dimensions indicated in diagrams 1A and 1B of Fig. 3.7.
Bradley suggested that with ø<20° there were no objectionable results regardless of abutment
geometry, but bigger angles may result in large eddies, reduced efficiency and scour.
In open channel flow, Kindsvater et al. (1953) and Kindsvater and Carter (1955) suggested
that skew (or angularity) of less than 20° has a relatively small effect in most cases, usually
causing less than a 5% reduction in discharge. However, the effect of skew becomes larger as
as the angle increases, and i s most apparent when M is near 1.0. For skew 2, Matthai (1967)
showed that when M=0.95 a 45° skew can reduce the discharge through an opening by up to
28%, but this reduces to 0% when M=0.36 (Fig. 4.3g). When M is small other hydraulic
factors predominate. Note that in the USGS method of analysis the projected opening width at
section 1 (b) is the same as the skewed width between the abutments (bS ) so b=bS regardless
of the skew angle ( Fig. 4.14a).
To summarise, a skewed waterway is usually regarded as having a smaller effective width
than a normal crossing so the value of Qb or Kb is reduced and a decrease in M is experienced.
These factors generally result in a small loss of hydraulic performance, but this can be as
much as 28% of the discharge capacity in extreme cases (but see below).

3.7.3 Change in submerged performance

After the opening has submerged, the orientation of the crossing with respect to the direction
of the approach flow is much less significant, since the situation is analagous to discharge
through an orifice, and M is irrelevant. The flow contracts strongly from the deck and enters
the opening at right angles to the face of the bridge, so the emerging jet is basically
perpendicular to the plane of the entrance. This is true even with skew 1 openings, where the
waterway is parallel to the sides of the channel. In a narrow channel the angled jet can lead to
severe scouring of the bank if it has not been protected. With skew 2 openings the direction of
the jet is more obvious. Note that the zone of drawdown, as delineated by the dashed line
showing the maximum afflux in Fig. 3.8, is also based on the line of the

upstream bridge face.
Given that the jet in submerged flow emerges perpendicularly to the bridge face, it is
reasonable to expect that the discharge capacity of the waterway is related to the skewed
width ( bS) of the opening. For example, assume a rectangular opening of height Z, with the
dimensions shown in Fig. 3.7, and then compare the following:

Page 86

Normal crossing

Skew 1A

Skew 1B

opening area along the line of the bridge face=10Z
projected opening area at section 1=10Z
opening area along the line of the bridge face=14.1Z
projected opening area at section 1=10Z
opening area along the line of the bridge face=10Z
projected opening area at section 1=7.1Z

Skew 1A has the largest all-round dimensions and could be expected to have the largest
discharge for a given stage. In model tests involving rectangular openings this was found to
be the case (Fig. 3.9a). This does not imply that skewed waterways are beneficial; it merely
demonstrates that it is not easy to predict their performance because the effective span of the
waterway is not always apparent. Conversely, skew 1B has the same area at the face (10Z) as
a normal crossing but a reduced projected area (7.1Z) so it has a worse stage-discharge
performance.
The geometry of a skewed, arched opening is more complex than that of a rectangle. If a
semicircular waterway is cut at an angle to give a type 1 skew then the entrance to the
opening is no longer a semicircle. Additionally, with an arch there is a strong radial
contraction towards the centre. This tends to make the effect of skew on the flow through
arches difficult to identify and measure, and as yet there appears to have been no satisfactory
study of the effect of skew on arch bridges, although there have been attempts (Husain and
Rao, 1966). However, Fig. 3.9b compares a normal semicircular arch ( b=bS=200mm) with a
45° skewed 1A arch with b= 200mm and bS=283mm. The larger value of bS results in an
increased discharge, but the increase is smaller than that obtained with the corresponding
rectangular opening in Fig. 3.9a.

3.8 Depth of flow, Y

For a given discharge, flow can occur over a wide range of depths depending upon the slope
and geometry of the channel, and on whether the flow is uniform or non-uniform. The values
of many variables, such as the Froude number (F), conveyance (K) and opening ratio (M), are
functions of the depth. Additionally, the depth of flow relative to the height of the bridge
opening can influence both the type of flow that occurs at a bridge site and the hydraulic
performance of the str ucture: it may determine whether or not a waterway becomes drowned
during flood. For example, if the value of

Table 3.1 Geometric properties of semicircular arches

Proportional depth, Yu/Z

Surface width, BT(m)

Cross-sectional area A(m2 )

Page 87

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

1.000×D
0.995
0.980
0.954
0.917
0.866
0.800
0.714
0.600
0.436
0

0
0.064×πD2/4
0.125
0.188
0.248
0.305
0.358
0.406
0.448
0.481
0.500

Notes:
1. Froude number, F=V /(gYM)½ where the mean depth, YM=A/BT.
2. For example, if V=1.5 m/s, Y u=1.75 m and the diameter of a semicircular arch, D= 5.0 m then Z=2.5 m and
YU /Z=0.7. From the table A=0.406×π×5.02/4=7.97 m2 and BT=0.714×5.0=3.57 m. Thus YM=7.97/3.57=2.23 m and
F3 =0.32.
3. There is an apparent anomaly with YM=A/BT=2.23 m and Y u=1.75 m, which is compounded by the fact that BT
decreases to zero when Y u/Z=1.0. Section 3.3 suggested an alternative approach with YM=A/b=7.97/5.0=1.59 m.
This gives F3=0.38. These figures illustrate the problem of obtaining a ‘correct’ value of F, particularly with
arched waterways.

YN in an unconstricted channel is similar to the height of a bridge opening (Z) then it is likely
that the waterway will become submerged (Fig. 3.1g).
The ratios YN/Z and Yu/Z are used in Figs 3.4 and 3.9 to illustrate hydraulic performance.
With arched openings the ratios are valuable in defining changes in geometry (Table 3.1). The
listing of the water surface widths and proportional cross -sectional areas is useful when
evaluating M and F 3.

3.9 Shape of the waterway opening

The shape of the waterway may affect the hydraulic performance of a bridge (Fig. 3.1h). For
instance, a rectangular opening with a width twice its height (b=2Z) has a 27% larger cross-
sectional area than the equivalent semicircular arch. This means that at any given stage a
rectangular opening will probably have a larger discharge and a smaller afflux than an arch of
the same span . These differences are likely to be most significant when the waterway is
running nearly full or full.
The distribution of velocity and the pattern of flow through a waterway will also vary
according to shape. For example, the upstream edge of an arch can impart a distinct radial
contraction (lateral and vertical) to the flow, even before the waterway becomes drowned.
This is apparent from

Page 88

Fig. 2.9 which shows how the point of maximum velocity moves nearer to the bed with rising
stage. With arches the gradually closing roof can produce a more gentle transition between
channel flow and sluice gate flow than a rectangular opening where (theoretically) the
waterway becomes drowned very abruptly when the water level rises above the horizontal
upstream soffit. In practice, the water surface may be lower in the centre of the opening
(because of the higher velocity head) than at the sides, so this transition is not always as
sudden as expected (Fig. 2.7). Nevertheless, a very large vertical contraction can occur from
the horizontal soffit after the opening has submerged and Yu>1.1Z . Section 7.2 shows that
rounding the soffit of the opening can significantly reduce the contraction and improve
hydraulic performance.
Differences in the shape of the waterway might also be expected to affect the values of the
coefficients of contraction and discharge. Matthai (1967) presented four different graphs of
the coefficient C' corresponding to the four different types of waterway listed in Section 4.2.1.
The coefficients of discharge of arched and rectangular waterways in Fig. 2.11 are also
different.

3.10 Channel roughness and shape

These parameters do have an influence on the hydraulic performance of a bridge, but it is
usually small. Generally they are not considered directly, although they are taken into account
indirectly in the calculation of the opening ratio (in terms of the discharge or conveyance,
equations 3.1 and 3.5) and the Froude number.
Channel roughness affects the differential head across the opening (∆h in Fig. 2.3), which
increases with increasing roughness. Heavy vegetation on the downstream floodplain
interferes with the natural expansion of the jet and causes a large afflux. The existence of
rough, scrub- or tree-covered floodplains also causes practical difficulties in estimating
roughness and friction loss, in addition to any limitation arising from the way in which these
parameters are incorporated into the hydraulic analysis of bridge performance. Conversely,
with smooth channels and relatively severe contractions the friction loss arising from
boundary roughness is insignificant compared with the differential head across the
constriction. In many cases the friction loss in the opening is negligible or assumed to be so
(see Section 4.2.1).
The relative roughness and shape of a river channel also affect the distribution of velocity
and discharge within it. For convenience, it is often assumed that there is a uniform velocity
over the entire width of the channel (as in equation 3.2). Unfortunately this is often unrealistic,
particularly when the flow is overbank in a compound channel where the velocity can vary
from almost nothing on the floodplains or at the banks to a large value in the deeper or central
parts of the main channel. To allow for this the velocity distribution coefficient, or kinetic
energy correction factor, a, is

Page 89

used to obtain the weighted average velocity head (aV2/2 g) at a cross-section (Chow, 1981;
French, 1986).
In a man-made channel with a uniform cross -sectional area a seldom exceeds a value of
1.15. Chow pointed out that a tends to be lower (1.10 minimum) with large, prismatic, straight
channels and when the flow is of considerable depth. The value is higher (1.20 maximum) for
small channels and when the conditions are the reverse of those just described. Natural
streams typically have a value of around 1.30, ranging from as low as 1.15 to a maximum of
1.50 depending upon the conditions. When the flow is over the floodplains, values range from
1.5 to 2.0 with 1.75 being a typical figure. Compound sections and natural rivers that
comprise several di stinct subchannels and/or floodplains, obstructions, bridges, weirs, and
pronounced irregularities in alignment can all result in values greater than 2.0. High values
are also possible in closed conduits, which may have relevance under some circumstances t o
bridge waterways running full. However, large values near 2.0 should be used sparingly, since
they cannot be justified very often. It is very difficult to give accurate guidelines regarding a
values so those just quoted must be regarded as extremely approximate; if possible the true
value should be established by calculation, as described below.
During a flood the mean velocity and hence the velocity head may be quite large (if
V=3m/s then V 2/2g=0.46m), so neglecting a or using an inappropriate value can significantly
affect the analysis. This problem often manifests itself in an energy line that looks wrong,
possibly because its elevation increases in the downstream direction. If the water surface has a
shallow slope, then any errors in the calculated ve locity heads at the various sections often
become apparent in this way.
The value of the dimensionless coefficient αfor a particular cross-section can be obtained
by splitting the channel into N subsections and then using the equation

where Qi and Vi are the discharge (m 3/s) and velocity (m/s) in the i th subsection, Q is the total
discharge of the river, and V is the average velocity of the whole section—that is, Q/A.
Example 3.2 illustrates the use of the equations.

Page 90

3.11 Scour

Scour is not really a hydraulic variable in the same way as some of the others described above,
but it can affect the afflux or backwater at a bridge site, so it has been included here as a
reminder. In some ways a scoured waterway may be considered as the natural equivalent of
the minimum -energy waterway described in Section 7.5. Scour itself is considered in much
more detail in Chapter 8.
If a bridge causes significant scour over a length of the river channel then the elevation of
both the bed and the water surface will be reduced if the depth of flow remains the same.
Consequently the head loss between the scoured sections and section 4 (where normal depth
occurs and scour is less likely) will decrease, as will the afflux. One method of allowing for
this is to estimate the scour depths and length of reach affected at different discharges, and
then adjust the measured bed levels accordingly. Another technique is to calculate the
increase in cross -sectional area caused by scour, ∆A S, and express this as a proportion of the
cross -sectional area of flow at section 2 at normal depth, AN2 (Bradley, 1978). The scour
correction factor,
, can then be obtained from Fig 3.10 and used to adjust either the normal
afflux,
(Fig. 2.3), or the drawdown of the water surface at section 3,
. Using this
technique the afflux with scour
is

Page 91

Fig. 3.10 Variation of the scour correction factor,
, with the proportional increase in scoured area,
∆AS/AN2 . By calculating the depth and area of scour the value of ∆AS/AN2 and thus
can be
obtained, hence the maximum afflux corrected for scour is

Page 92

Fig. 3.11 (a) Approximate dimensions of Canns Mill Bridge and (b) the corresponding variation of
opening ratio M=AN2/AN1 with stage obtained from equation 3.8 assuming a constant
channel width of 5.5 m.

change with stage. Equation 3.3 is more appropriate, where M=a/A= A N2/AN1 and where AN1
and AN2 are the cross-sectional areas of sections 1 (upstream) and 2 (opening area) at normal
depth (YN) so that AN1=BYN When the water level is below the springline of the arch A N2=bYN,
and this applies up to YN=0.6m when AN2=4.28×0.60=2.57m2. After this 2.57 m2 must be
added to the area calculated from the numerator of Equation 3.8. Referring to Figs 3.2d and
3.11a :

Page 93

distance between bed and centre of curvatu re O=2.70−1.80=0.90m
distance between O and arch springs, d=0.90+0.60=1.50m
height of water surface above O, h=YN+0.90 m

The area of flow between the bed and the water surface for any depth of flow, YN, in the
segmental arch can be calculated from the numerator of equation 3.8, written here with π/180
included to convert to radians. For instance, if YN=1.65m, then h=1.65+0.90=2.55m and

Now AN1=5.50×1.65=9.08 m2
Thus M=AN2/AN1=6.17/9.08=0.68

Notes
1. M is not constant but varies with stage, so this calculation has to be repeated with other
values of YN. The resulting variation of A N1, AN2 and M is shown in Fig. 3.11b. It is
apparent that A N1 increases linearly, while AN2 curves upward to reach a constant value of
6.36 m2, which corresponds to the full waterway opening. As the stage rises and the crown
begins to close, M reduces to around 0.64. After this M decreases sharply as AN2 is constant
whereas A N1 continues to increase.
2. If the opening had been rectangular, the line representing A N2 would have been straight so
that AN2/AN1 would have a constant value equal to b/B .
3. The calculation of the cross -sectional areas (channel and opening) is often best
accomplished with a digitiser since in reality they are usually irregular. A simple graph of
area against stage can be produced, eliminating the need for the calculations above.
4. This example over-simplifies: see Fig. 3.3 and Example 3.3.

Example 3.2

A bridge has a single rectangular opening 10m wide, which is the same width as the main
river channel at low stages (Fig. 3.12). However, during flood the bridge obstructs the flow
over the floodplains. The dimensions and Manning roughness coefficients are shown in the
diagram. Assuming uniform flow, that the longitudinal slope of the channel and floodplains is
1 in 1000, and a depth of 4m in the main channel, estimate the following: (a) the

Page 94

Fig. 3.12 A compound channel split into three subsections by dotted vertical lines. The roug hness of
the various parts of the channel is shown by the values of Manning’s n. The conveyance of
the subsections is calculated in Example 3.2.

conveyance of the upstream cross-section, K; (b) the velocity distribution coefficient, a; (c)
the bridge open ing ratio, M.
(a) The total conveyance of the upstream section 1 was denoted by K in equation 3.5. The
value of K can be obtained by evaluating the right -hand part of equation 3.6 with respect to
each of the three subsections shown in Fig. 3.12 and then adding the values, thus:

(3.21)

Page 95

(b) The velocity distribution coefficient can be estimated by calculating the discharge (Qi ) and
velocity (Vi ) in each of the subsections and then using equation 3.18.

Subsection

Page 96

to the same distance scale. The shape of the cumulative conveyance curve between the
plotted points can then be ‘shaped’ using the cumulative area curve as a guide. By this
means a better estimate of the conveyance in various parts of the channel might be
obtained.
5. Another point to remember is that when the value of Manning’s n is not uniform over the
whole perimeter of a subsection then the effective value of n has to be calculated: that is,
nE. This is not difficult, but if the problem has not been encountered before it is possible to
make mistakes. Equation 3.22 was recommended (Hydraulics Research, 1988) for British

(3.22)

Page 97

Fig. 3.13 (a) A simplified cross-section of section 1 at Canns Mill (Fig. 3.3a) showing the areas of
floodplain storage that do not contribute to flow. The dimensions and Manning’s n values
are also marked. The discharge in the three channel subsections is calculated in Example
3.3 prior to calculating M. (b) The dimensions of the bridge. The roughness coefficients are
as for section 1.

Introduction
One of the most common mistakes made by graduate engineers when analysing hydraulic
problems involving bridges is to assume that the flow upstream of the structure is uniform so
that the bed slope can be substituted in the Manning equation to obtain the discharge. In
reality, there may be an abnormal stage with or without the bridge ( Fig. 2.4) so the bed, water
surface, and total energy line all have different gradients. Under these conditions the slope of
the energy line (friction gradient, SF ) over about 10–20 channel widths should be used. This is
often much flatter than the bed slope. Similarly, the friction slope on the floodplain may be
less than in the main channel.
Another potential source of error lies in using the maximum flood level (which may be
indicated by deposited flood debris) to determine the cross-sectional area of flow. This often
introduces significant errors because the flood level shows the maximum flooded cross -
section not the maximum cross -sectional area of flow, which may be much less. In other
words, there may be no flow through some of the cross-section, the water on parts of the
floodplains being stationary (floodplain storage). The only way to ascertain

Page 98

whether or not this is the case is to be on site during a flood to observe what happens. The
importance of t his is illustrated below.
The approach adopted in this example is to split the compound channel into three
subsections: the left floodplain, the main channel, and the right floodplain. It is assumed that
the sum of the discharges in the three subsections must equal that in the whole channel, and
indeed the quantity passing through the bridge opening since there was no flow around it. At
the maximum gauged flow of 15 m 3/s a stage of approximately 2.23 m exists in the main
channel at section 1.

Assumptions

LEFT FLOODPLAIN
By observation it is known that at 15 m 3/s there is flow only through the 10m of the
floodplain adjacent to the main river channel; the rest of the inundated area beyond this does
not contribute to the flow, and is marked as storage in Fig. 3.13a. It is assumed that the
dividing vertical on the left has zero roughness, as is customary.
The top of the hedgebank between the left floodplain and the main channel is about 1.5m
high when measured from the bottom of the main channel ( Fig. 3.3a). Because the bank is
lower much further upstream, water can enter the floodplain but it cannot return to the main
channel and pass through the bridge until the stage exceeds 1.5m. Thus it is assumed that any
water stored below the 1.5m stage is floodplain storage, over the top of which passes the live
part of the stream. Thus at 15 m 3/s a depth of (2.23 −1.50)=0.73m exists over the 10m wide
floodplain. It is not appropriate to assume that this horizontal interface between the stationary
water and the live stream has zero roughness (because then practically the entire perimeter of
t he subsection would be frictionless) so a roughness equivalent to the underlying floodplain,
namely 0.035 s/m 1/3, is adopted (see Hydraulics Research, 1988).
The dividing vertical on the right of the subsection is the bank and hedge through which the
water ultimately has to flow, incurring a significant and visible loss of head in the process.
This boundary is assumed to be relatively rough, with n=0.150 s/m1/3.

THE MAIN CHANNEL
This is assumed to have n=0.035 s/m1/3 across the 5.5m width of the channel with both
sides having n=0.08 s/m1/3 over the full height, although the bottom part of the channel is
perhaps smoother and the top part with the hedge rougher.
To calculate the bridge opening ratio from M =q/Q the waterway has to be projected
upstream to section 1, with q representing the flow in this projected subsection of the main
channel (i.e. the quantity that can pass through the bridge without contraction), and Q the total
discharge, including the floodplains. Thus the main channel itself has to be subdivided

Page 99

(Fig. 3.13b). It is assumed that the bed has a roughness (0.035 s/m1/3 ) while the imaginary
projected boundary of t he arch is ignored.
At 15m 3/s the stage is 2.23 m while the height of the arch is 1.8m, so the opening is
submerged. By calculating the discharge (q) through the projected waterway area (6.30m) the
value of M will include the vertical contraction through the bridge. Note that if the width of
the opening (4.30m) was projected upstream over the full 2.23m depth this would be
equivalent to an unsubmerged rectangular opening with an area of 9.59 m.

RIGHT FLOODPLAIN
The right floodplain, like the left, is approximately 1.5m above the bottom of the main
channel. It has a transverse slope towards the main channel, so the width of the floodplain
varies with stage. At 15 m3/s the maximum depth at the interface with the main channel is
(2.23−1.50)=0.73m, reducing to zero over a slope distance of 15 m as shown in Fig. 3.13a .
The roughnesses of both surfaces are included in the calculations, being 0.080 s/m 1/3 and
0.035 s/m 1/3 for the left and bottom boundaries respectively.

Calculations
These are conducted for each of the subsections in turn. Important features
(a) the non-uniform roughness around the wetted perimeter necessitating the calculation of
the effective Manning roughness (nE) for the subsection, as follows:

(3.24)

where P i=length of ith perimeter, ni=roughness of i th perimeter and P= the length of the
total wetted perimeter used in the calculations (see French, 1986);
(b) the friction gradients of the main channel and floodplains are unknown, so it is not
possible to obtain directly the discharges. This problem is overcome by first calculating the
conveyances of the subsections at two different discharges (15m 3/s and 12.5m3/s) and then
equating the total conveyance to the gauged discharge to obtain the gradients. The discharge
in the subsections can then be calculated.

LEFT FLOODPLAIN
Sectional area
Wetted perimet er,

From equation 3.6, conveyance

109m 3/s

MAIN CHANNEL—PROJECTED BRIDGE OPENING

Page 100

MAIN CHANNEL—REMAINDER

Using the same roughness coefficients as for section 1 in Fig. 3.13a :

RIGHT FLOODPLAIN

TOTAL CONVEYANCE AND RELATIONSHIP TO DISCHARGE
Total conveyance of main channel,

2.00m, then another equation is obtained:

and
giving SFF=0.000376 or 1 in 2660
As a check, if the conveyances corresponding to 10.8m 3/s and a stage of 1.85m are
calculated then

Page 101

Page 102

References

Ackers, P. (1992) Hydraulic design of two stage channels. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, Water Maritime and Energy, 96, December, 247–257.
Ackers, P. (1993) Stage-discharge functions for two stage channels: the impact of new research.
Journal of the Institution of Water and Environmental Management, 7, February, 52–61.
Biery, P.F. and Delleur, J.W. (1962) Hydraulics of single span arch bridge constrictions. Proceedings
of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the Hydraulics Division, 88 (HY2), March,
75–108.
Bradley, J.N. (1978) Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways, 2nd edn, US Department of
Transportation/Federal Highways Administration, Washington DC.
Chow, V.T. (1981) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo.
French, R.H. (1986) Open-Channel Hydraulics, International Student Edition, McGraw-Hill,
Singapore.
Hamill, L. (1993) A guide to the hydraulic analysis of single-span arch bridges. Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 98, 1–11.
Hamill, L. (1997) Improved flow through bridge waterways by entrance rounding. Proceedings of the
Institut ion of Civil Engineers, Municipal Engineer, 121, 7–21.
Henderson, F.M. (1966) Open Channel Flow, Macmillan, New York.
Husain, S.T. and Rao, G.M. (1966) Hydraulics of river flow under arch bridges. Irrigation and Power,
October, 441–454.
Hydraulics Research. (1988) Assessing the hydraulic performance of environmentally acceptable
channels. Report EX 1799, Hydraulics Research Ltd, Wallingford, England.
Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) (1990) HEC-2 Water Surface Profile User’s Manual, US Army
Corps of Engineers, Davis, CA.
Kindsvater, C.E. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Tranquil flow through open -channel constrictions.
Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 955–992.
Kindsvater, C.E., Carter, R.W. and Tracy, H.J. (1953) C omputation of peak discharge at contractions,
Circular 284, United States Geological Survey, Washington DC.
Laursen, E.M. (1984) Assessing vulnerability of bridges to floods, in Transportation Research Record
950, Second Bridge Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Transportation Research Board/National
Research Council, Washington DC, pp 222 –229.
Matthai, H.F. (1967) Measurement of peak discharge at width contractions by indirect methods.
Techniques of Water Resource Investigations of the United States Geologi cal Survey, Chapter A4,
Book 3, Applications of Hydraulics, US Government Printing Office, Washington DC.
Tracy, H.J. and Carter, R.W. (1955) Backwater effects of open -channel constrictions. Transactions of
the American Society of Civil Engineers, 120, 993–1018.
Yarnell, D.L. (1934) Bridge piers as channel obstructions. Technical Bulletin No. 444, November, US
Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.

